CYBERSECURITY: DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE U.S. GOVERNMENT                                         Joeli R. Field   INTL604 Interagency Operations   American Military University   September 18, 2010                                               INTRODUCTION   2            The  cyber  threat  is  one  of  the  most  serious  economic  and  national  security   challenges we face as a nation.
Whether  for  professional  services,  safeguarding  of  classified  federal  information  or  personal   correspondence,  the  Internet  and  computer  networks  are  vital  to  American  infrastructure.
Protection  of  this  cyber  infrastructure  is  defined  as  cybersecurity  (Aitoro  2010).
For  clarity   purposes,  several  terms  regarding  cybersecurity  will  be  defined.
Cyber-espionage is an attempt to steal sensitive digital information from a   government  or  network  (Harris  2010).
Cybercrime  is  any  type  of  theft  in  which  a  computer  or   network has been used to commission the crime (Aitoro 2010).
The  problem  with  any  of  these  defined  cyber  threats  is  that  with  the  vast  number  of   Internet and network users, it is hard to identify who the threat is or where it is based.
Various   government  agencies  have  developed  their  own  methods  for  dealing  with  cybersecurity,  but  a   collective  effort  to  protect  the  nation?s  infrastructure  is  a  relatively  new  idea.
Successful   interagency  operations  have  occurred  for  kinetic  threats  facing  the  nation,  but  the  non-kinetic   cyber arena has federal agencies mismanaging resources and duplicating efforts to protect their   own infrastructure.
3      The general research question proposed in this paper is: Why is cybersecurity important   to  national  security?
The  specific  research  question  is:  How  can  the  U.S.  government  most   effectively manage cybersecurity responsibility among federal agencies?
It is important that this   topic  is  studied  because  as  the  Internet  grows,  so  will  the  vulnerability  of  American   infrastructure  to  cyber  threats.
For  brevity  purposes,  this  paper  will  not  discuss  who  is   responsible  for  defending  the  public  arena  or  private  sector,  but  will  focus  on  cybersecurity   responsibility  within  federal  agencies.
This  paper  consists  of  a  review  of  literature  available   regarding  cybersecurity  responsibility,  followed  by  an  analysis  and  examination  of  three   proposals  in  which  the  U.S.  government  could  most  effectively  manage  cybersecurity   responsibility concerning the protection of American infrastructure.
LITERATURE REVIEW      Credibility of Cyber Threats   The majority of existing literature about cybersecurity states that cyber threats should be   a  credible  concern  for  the  U.S.  government.
Several  government  officials,  including  former   Director  of  the  CIA  and  Retired  General  Michael  Hayden;  recently  appointed  cybersecurity   policy  official  Howard  Schmidt;  U.S.  Cyber  Command  Commander  General  Keith  Alexander;   and U.S. President Barack Obama have publicly acknowledged the importance of cybersecurity   and the impact that a major cyber attack could have on the economy and the United States as a   whole.
The  Internet  is  an  “open  playground”  where  anyone  could  fall  victim  to  cybercrime   (Aitoro  2010,  1).
Though  the  government  is  on  board  and  actively  promoting  cybersecurity,      4   some technology experts think the government is merely blowing it out of proportion to scare the   public  and  reel  them  into  a  financial  scam.
Schneier  (2010),  a  security  technologist  and   renowned  author  on  security  issues,  has  agreed  that  there  is  a  need  for  protection  against   cybercrime and cyber-espionage, but that government officials over-exaggerate the severity of a   pending cyberwar (Doesburg 2010).
However, former national network hacker Marc Maiffret has admitted it is easy to hack   into  government  networks  and  that  government  officials  have  reason  to  be  concerned.
He   performed a penetration test on a city in California and was able to gain access to the city?s water   supply  within  two  hours  (Aitoro  2010).
This example, along with massive   amounts  of  literature  addressing  the  credibility  of  cyber  threats,  regardless  of  extensive   discussion or lack of suggested responses to those threats, further emphasizes the need to study   who is responsible for defending the nation against these threats.
Response Methods to Cyber Threats   A  number  of  cyber  threats  exist,  but  according  to  Maiffret,  the  top  two  are  cybercrime   and cyber-espionage (Aitoro 2010).
There  are  discussions  throughout  literature  on  how  to  best   approach cyber threats; whether offensive or defensive tactics are best; and whether proactive or   reactive responses are most effective against credible cyber threats.
All  networks  need  to  be  concerned  about  defensive  cybersecurity.
Max  Kelley,  former   chief of security of  Facebook, suggests the reactive approach: focus less  on vulnerabilities  and      5   more on actual threats (Mohney 2010).
Though  easier  to  manage,  it  alone  would  not  protect  American  government   infrastructure.
The  National  Security  Council?s  Cybersecurity  Web  site  has  posted  on  its  main  page   President Barack Obama?s May 2009 discussion of cyber threats and what the government must   do in  response to  the threats: defensively improve resilience to  cyber incidents  and offensively   reduce the number of cyber threats.
Hayden agrees that the approach to cybersecurity needs to be   offensive (Goodin 2010, Schmidt 2010).
However,  federal  agencies  are  already  having  troubles  merely  defending  themselves  against   cyber  threats.
Each  agency  could  not  be  expected  to  pursue  offensive  cybersecurity  as  well.
Therein lies the question of cybersecurity responsibility.
Who is Responsible: Lack of Leadership and Clearly Defined Roles   On May 29, 2009, President Obama called for the President?s Cyberspace Policy Review   –  a  60-day  review  of  cybersecurity  policies  and  procedures  led  by  the  Government   Accountability  Office  (GAO).
The  president  also  addressed  a  near-term  action  plan  with  10   national  objectives  regarding  cybersecurity.
Two  of  those  objectives  discussed  cybersecurity   responsibility:  No.
1  to  appoint  a  cybersecurity  policy  official  and  No.
The two most relevant findings regarding cybersecurity responsibility were      6   a lack of leadership and a lack of clearly defined roles for the federal agencies.
The  GAO  report  identified  the  issues  with  cybersecurity  and   provided  recommendations.
This  method  was  effective,  as  the  government  took  the  report   seriously and successfully appointed a cybersecurity policy official, Howard Schmidt.
The  initial  GAO  report  also  recommended  that  organizations  continue  with  their   operational roles, but follow the coordinating official?s guidance in response to a cyber incident   (8).
This  is  a  good  thought,  but  cyber  threats  are  non-kinetic  and  unlike  other  threats  the  U.S.   government has faced.
Hayden states that the Defense Department?s approach to kinetic warfare   does not  work in  the cyber arena (Vijayan 2010).
Lines would be crossed, there would be   duplication  of  effort  and  no  information  sharing  or  communication.
Because  of  these  issues,   there needs to be clearly defined roles for each government agency for cybersecurity.
Summary and Research Hypothesis   Cybersecurity  is  a  priority  for  the  U.S.  government  as  a  whole.
Several  government   agencies have already established proactive and responsive methods of cybersecurity to protect   their networks against potential cyber threats.
Despite the appointment of a cybersecurity official   and  declaration  of  national  objectives  towards  a  near-term  cybersecurity  action  plan,  however,      7   the U.S. government is  not prepared to defend its networks should a severe cyber threat  ensue,   due  to  ill  cooperation  between  and  duplication  of  effort  by  federal  agencies.
Available   cybersecurity literature – specifically the GAO report – provides extensive information regarding   cybersecurity,  its  importance,  and  ways  the  government  can  better  defend  itself  against  cyber   criminals.
The  hypothesis  for  this  study  is  if  the  U.S.  government  does  not  create  a  new  agency   responsibility  for  cybersecurity,  then  a  credible  cyber  threat  will  have  a  severe  effect  on   American  infrastructure.
Three  possible  solutions  to  how  the  U.S.  government  could  most   effectively manage responsibility of cybersecurity between the federal agencies will be explored   in  this  paper.
The  U.S.  government  could  keep  its  current  infrastructure  as  is,  reorganize  the   infrastructure of the existing federal agencies or create a new cybersecurity agency.
According to   Maiffret,  the  question  of  a  cyber  attack  on  major  infrastructure  in  the  United  States  is  not  a   matter of if, but when (Aitoro 2010), therefore it is important for the government to decide who   will be responsible for defending the nation?s infrastructure against cyber threats.
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS   Schmidt  says  the  government  is  working  together  better  now  than  ever  before.
His   priorities  are  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  in  cyberspace,  implement  secure  access  and  improve   information  sharing  and  communication  with  industries  and  the  private-sector  (Miller  2010).
Despite the government working better, changes need to be made within the federal government   in order for cybersecurity to be effective.
Three different alternatives will be explored in this next      section:  keeping  the  current  infrastructure,  reorganizing  the  current  infrastructure  or  creating  a   new cybersecurity agency altogether.
Each section will include an explanation of the alternative,   the pros and cons of the alternative and what is needed for that alternative to be successful.
Currently, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is  the main authority of   cybersecurity (Leithauser 2010).
Cybersecurity   is not treated as a separate issue.
Each agency is left to defend themselves against cyber threats   and  can  use  whatever  strategy  works  best  for  them  (Harknett  2009).
Schmidt,  the  national   cybersecurity  coordinator,  merely  serves  as  an  advisor.
He  can  make  suggestions  and  provide   advice,  but  has  no  authority  over  any  of  the  organizations;  each  organization  has  its  own   leadership.
One can argue that because these organizations are   already  established,  they  can  better  manage  cybersecurity  internally.
Unfortunately,  what  is  currently  in  place  is  not   defensively  effective  against  cyber  threats  and  there  are  no  pros  to  continuing  with  the  current   infrastructure.
The cons for this alternative are cultural biases and gaps, lack of coordination, absence of   leadership and low priority of cybersecurity.
First, organizations are already established and set   in  their  ways.
They  are  not  designed  to  defend  against  a  cyber  threat  and  are  unlikely  to  alter      9   their  structure  or  the  way  that  they  operate  to  do  so.
Second,  every  organization  is  in  it  for   themselves.
They want to protect their own network and are not concerned with protecting other   networks.
Third, there is an absence   of cybersecurity leadership within each organization and the United States in general.
Despite the cybersecurity coordinator attempting to advise all agencies, there is a duplication of   effort and poor resource management.
Last and most important, cybersecurity is not a priority in   individual agencies.
Agencies were created to accomplish their own mission, so cybersecurity is   on the back burner.
In order for the current infrastructure to be successful,   organizations need to improve communication with each other and share information.
Most importantly, cybersecurity needs to   be  made  a  priority  within  federal  agencies.
Secondary  efforts  and  poor  budgeting  of   cybersecurity defense will not protect government agencies and their networks.
This alternative   could  be  successful,  but  government  agencies  need  to  work  together  and  make  cybersecurity  a   priority by budgeting and appointing leadership within their own organization.
10            Reorganization of Infrastructure   There are several ways to reorganize the current infrastructure to  better protect the U.S.   government from cyber threats.
The 2010 Protecting Cyberspace as a National Asset Act (2010)   recommends that the U.S. government establish a cybersecurity office in the White House (13).
The reorganization in this section will discuss the establishment of a cybersecurity office in the   White House in concert with the transfer of authority from DHS to the cybersecurity coordinator,   and  the  appointment  of  a  cybersecurity  official  within  each  organization  to  report  to  the   coordinator.
The  pros  of  this  alternative  include  meeting  the  cyber  needs  of  each  organization;   centralized  effort;  coordinator  and  agency  accountability;  and  making  cybersecurity  a  priority   within federal agencies.
First, this alternative meets the defensive network needs of each agency.
People within an agency know their organization better than anyone outside of it.
An external leader does not have the   insider?s perspective necessary for defense of an organization?s network.
The appointment of an   official within each organization ensures that each organization is  equally represented.
Second,   centralized authority ensures better flow of information, ease of communication and consistency   with  cyber  defense  across  the  government  agencies.
Third,  this  alternative  keeps  the  coordinator  and  all  agencies  accountable  for  cybersecurity   defense.
By  giving  the  cybersecurity  coordinator  authority,  he  can  hold  the  organizations   accountable.
By  appointing  officials  within  each  organization,  they  can  hold  the  coordinator      11   accountable.
This mutual accountability gives hope that cybersecurity can be made a priority for   federal agencies.
Along  with  the  pros  of  this  alternative  are  four  cons:  time,  internal  experts,  conflict  of   leadership and budgeting.
First, it will take years for a successful program to develop.
The appointment of a new official within   each  organization  could  take  some  getting  used  to.
Second,  each  agency  may  not  have  a   cybersecurity  expert.
An  external  body  would  not  be  as  effective  as  someone  appointed  from   within  an  organization.
The  officials  in  the   agencies would have two bosses – the cybersecurity coordinator and the head of their respective   organization.
Finally,  it  may  be  difficult  for  each   official  to  convince  their  organization  that  cybersecurity  is  a  priority;  more  of  that  agency?s   budget will need to be dedicated to defend their networks against cyber attacks.
Unfortunately,   one individual may not be able to affect an entire organization.
In order for reorganization to be successful, officials will need to be taken seriously, be   able  to  influence  their  respective  organization  and  receive  appointment  from  the  president.
If   agencies  do  not  take  their  officials  seriously,  then  cybersecurity  will  not  be  made  a  priority.
Additionally, if officials are not influential, they may not be able to affect budgeting within their   organization.
A presidential appointment of officials would state to the organizations, the nation   and the world that the United States acknowledges cybersecurity as a credible issue and places   defense against cyber threats as a top priority.
12   Creation of New Cybersecurity Agency         The National Security Act of 1947 and Homeland Security Act of 2002 both created new   agencies  within  the  federal  government:  the  Air  Force,  National  Security  Council,  Central   Intelligence Agency and Department of Defense were created in 1947, and DHS was created in   2002  (Harknett  2009).
In  these  instances,  the  federal  agencies  were  revised  quickly  after  their   creation to better meet mission requirements and justify their existence.
Following this historical   trend,  the  Cybersecurity  Act  of  2009  could  create  a  new  federal  agency  dedicated  to   cybersecurity.
The final alternative is creating a new agency responsible for defending all federal   networks against cyber threats.
With the creation of a new agency, the cybersecurity coordinator   will  remain  in  place  and  become  the  director  of  the  new  agency.
This  individual  will  have   authority over all issues in the cybersecurity realm and will report directly to the president.
There are many pros to this alternative, including establishing cybersecurity as a priority;   clearly  defined  roles  and  responsibilities;  and  offensive  cybersecurity.
Currently,  each   organization  compiles  the  resources  they  can  to  defend  themselves  against  cyber  threats.
Their   primary mission is unrelated to cybersecurity.
The creation of a new agency will emphasize the   importance of making cybersecurity a priority.
A centralized agency dedicated to cybersecurity   will  allow  for  all  funding,  personnel,  efforts,  etc.,  to  be  focused  on  cybersecurity  defense.
Cybersecurity  will  no  longer  be  a  burden  or  secondary  objective  to  federal  organizations.
Third,  with  solid  cyber   defense in place, the U.S. government can finally take offensive cybersecurity seriously.
Unlike      13   already-established  agencies,  old  positions  within  the  agency  will  not  have  to  incorporate  new   threats; the cyber threat will dictate the roles and responsibilities of the new organization.
There are a few cons to the option of creating a new agency, including cultural bias, time   and  initial  vulnerability.
First,  when  a  new  agency  is  created  from  multiple  agencies,  cultures   will  be  carried  over  from  other  organizations.
It  could  take  years  for  a  new  cyber  agency  to   develop a culture and strong sense of a mission of its own (Builder 1989).
Second, it will take a   significant  amount  of  time  to  become  an  effective  and  efficient  organization.
It  will  also  take   time for the rest of the federal government to welcome the new organization into the community   of  agencies.
Finally,  because  of  the  amount  of  time  it  would  take  for  the  new  organization  to   become  effective,  there  will  most  likely  be  an  initial  vulnerability  period  which  may  make  the   nation even more susceptible to attack.
First,  the   agency will need to have clearly defined roles within the organization itself as well as its roles   and relationships with other federal agencies.
It  will have to be very clear what cyber authority   and  responsibility  will  be  transferred  from  current  organizations  to  the  new  one.
The   cybersecurity  coordinator  and  future  director  of  the  new  agency  will  need  to  decide  specifics   regarding logistics, organization and management.
The new cybersecurity agency will also need   a  clear  mission  and  vision  to  establish  an  identity  and  separate  itself  from  all  other  federal   agencies.
All   entities  need  to  be  in  place  before  the  president  announces  the  future  creation  of  a  new   cybersecurity agency.
If not, the United States will become susceptible to a major cyber incident.
14      Best Alternative         The  first  alternative  is  the  most  unlikely  to  be  successful  because  the  current   infrastructure  is  not  effective  against  cyber  threats.
Cyber  infiltration  has  already  troubled  the   U.S.  government  and  will  continue  to  do  so  if  changes  to  government  infrastructure  are  not   made.
The  purpose  of  the  Cybersecurity  Policy  Review  was  to  make  changes  to  the  way  the   federal  government  addresses  cybersecurity.
Centralized  and  concentrated  cybersecurity  effort,  coordinator   and  agency  accountability  and  prioritization  of  cybersecurity  are  positive  characteristics  of   reorganization  that  will  make  cyber  defense  more  effective  than  the  current  infrastructure.
Reorganizing  the  current  infrastructure  shows  more  promise  than  keeping  the  current   infrastructure, but both of these alternatives focus merely on cyber defense.
Cyber defense may   be the top priority now, but cyber offense must also be considered for the future.
The creation of a new agency dedicated to cybersecurity is the only alternative that can   even  consider  cyber  offense.
This  alternative  encompasses  the  positive  characteristics  of   reorganization  with  the  added  benefit  of  future  considerations  of  offensive  cybersecurity.
The   potential for offensive strategy, centralized authority and cyber defense efforts, and prioritization      of cybersecurity make the creation of a new federal agency the best alternative for the future of   cybersecurity in the United States.
15               CONCLUSION   Cybersecurity  is  a  growing  interest  of  the  U.S.  government  because  of  its  current   vulnerability  to  cyber  infiltration.
To  protect  itself  from  cyber  threats,  the  federal  government   can  consider  three  alternatives:  keep  its  current  infrastructure,  reorganize  its  current   infrastructure, or create a new federal agency dedicated to cybersecurity.
All three recognize the need for leadership, clearly defined roles   and  responsibilities,  centralized  coordination,  centralized  efforts,  and  the  need  to  make   cybersecurity  a  priority.
Regardless  of  which  alternative  the  government  chooses,  it  will  take   time  for  the  cyber  program  to  develop  and  become  fully  operational  and  effective  (Harknett   2009).
The federal government had great momentum after the release of the Cybersecurity Policy   Review, but has since slowed down (Cheek 2010).
If things do not change, the United States will   remain  vulnerable  to  cyber  infiltration.
It  is  only  a  matter  of  time  before  a  major  cyber  attack   ensues.
How the government prepares now will determine how secure it will be.
“Roles and responsibilities key to making cybersecurity work.
NextGov,   August 19, 2010, http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20100819_3485.php (accessed  September 16, 2010).
NextGov,  August 6, 2010, http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20100806_9847.php (accessed  September 2, 2010).
Heritage scholar: America needs clearer lines of authority in cyber.
Cyber Policy, The New New Internet, August 27, 2010,  http://www.thenewnewinternet.com/2010/08/27/heritage-scholar-america-needs-clearer- lines-of-authority-in-cyber (accessed September 16, 2010).
NZHerald, August 2,   2010, http://www.nzherald.co.nz/business/news/article.cfm?c_id=3&objectid=10662313  (accessed September 3, 2010).
Fog of cyberwar: internet always favors the offense.
The Register, July 29th   2010, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2010/07/29/internet_warfare_keynote/ (accessed  September 4, 2010).
http://www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/Cyberspace_Policy_Review_final.pdf  (accessed September 4, 2010).
The cybersecurity triad: Government, private  sector partners, and the engaged cybersecurity citizen.” Journal of Homeland Security  and Emergency Management 6, no.
1 (2009),  http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy1.apus.edu/ (accessed September 16, 2010).
NextGov, July 30, 2010.   http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20100730_1013.php (accessed September 2, 2010).
cyber defenses.”   Cybersecurity Policy Report, July 12, 2010,  http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy1.apus.edu/ (accessed September 16, 2010).
Schmidt says cyber coordination on upswing.
Federal News Radio, August  9, 2010, http://www.federalnewsradio.com/index.php?nid=110&sid=2022774 (accessed  September 4, 2010).
DNS,   July 30, 2010, http://dns.tmcnet.com/topics/internet-security/articles/93748-ex-cso- facebook-wants-cyber-counterinsurgency-doctrine.htm (accessed September 3, 2010).
Cybersecurity progress after President Obama?s address.
National   Security Council, July 14, 2010,  http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/nsc/cybersecurity/progressreports/july201 0 (accessed September 4, 2010).
Progress report on cybersecurity.
The White House Blog, entry posted   July 14, 2010, http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2010/07/14/progress-report- cybersecurity?utm_source=related (accessed September 4, 2010).
Schneier on Security, n.d., www.schneier.com   (accessed September 4, 2010).
U.S. should seek world cooperation on cyber conflict, says ex-CIA   Director.
Computerworld.com, July 29, 2010,  http://www.computerworld.com/article/9179873/U.S._should_seek_world_cooperation_o n_cyber_conflict_says_ex_CIA_ director (accessed September 3, 2010).
Leadership and Responsibility for Cybersecurity  Melissa E. Hathaway  According to Darwin, “it is not the most intellectual of the  species that survives; it is not the strongest that survives; but  the species that survives is the one that is able best to adapt  and  adjust  to  the  changing  environment  in  which  it  finds  itself.”1  We  have  certainly  adapted  to  the  Internet  and  the  technology  that  underpins  it.
In  fact,  we  have  made  it  an  integral part of just about everything in our life; and in many  ways we take it for granted that it will always work twenty-four  hours a day, seven days a week.
There are approximately 2.5  billion Internet users around the world of which nearly half  are below the age of twenty-five.2 Yet, there is another set of  actors that have adapted more successfully: criminals, spies,  and some clever guys.
Media headlines announce daily that  our bank accounts are being robbed, our intellectual prop- erty is being illegally copied, and our critical infrastructures  are  penetrated  and  could  stop  working  at  any  moment.
Hathaway  served  as  Cyber  Coor- dination Executive and  Director  of  the  Joint  Interagency Cyber Task  Force  in  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  National  Intelligence.
Previously,  Hathaway  was  a  Principal  with  Booz  Allen  &  Hamil- ton, Inc.  [71]  LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY  responsibility for resolving it.
Instead,  our  leaders  appear  to  be  paralyzed  by  the  prolonged  economic  recovery  and  are in denial of the security needs of our  infrastructures  and  enterprises.
This  tension  is  further  exacerbated  by  the  competition for resources, lagging pol- icy implementation, and an ill-defined  technology roadmap to address security  shortfalls  as  we  adopt  and  embed  the  next-generation  technology  into  our  infrastructures and enterprises.
This paper describes a series  of  case  studies  that  highlight  the  lack  of  attention  being  paid  to  this  seri- ous problem and the subsequent policy  and technology solutions that are being  brought to bear to close the gap.
In  the  fall  of  2010,  Deputy  Secre- tary  of  Defense  William  Lynn  stated  that the Department of Defense (DoD)  had  “suffered  a  significant  compro- mise of its classified military computer  networks.”4  The  penetration  occurred  in  2008  and  was  delivered  via  trust- ed  uniformed  military  personnel  who  were using USB mass-storage devices to  move  important  operational  informa- tion between unclassified and classified  systems  in  support  of  U.S.  Central  Command’s  military  operations.
The  devices  at  issue  contained  a  malicious  computer code, which was able to pro-  [72]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs    liferate  undetected  from  network  to  network.
The  code  was  designed  to  illegally  copy  information  and,  when  possible,  transfer  it  to  servers  under  foreign control.
The DoD code-named the discovery  of,  and  recovery  from,  this  incident  “Operation  Buckshot  Yankee.”  Gov- ernment  leaders  wanted  to  learn  the  extent  of  the  penetration  and  whether  the  networks  could  still  be  “trusted.”  Thousands of man-hours were expend- ed  to  hunt  and  isolate  the  infections.
The  DoD  developed  and  deployed  technology to detect and close commu- nication channels, as well as to eradicate  the  infections.
From  a  policy  perspective,  the  Sec- retary of Defense and the Chairman of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  announced  a  temporary  abandonment  of  the  use  of  portable  media/storage  devices.
From  a  technology  perspective,  it  required  a  change  in  architecture.
And  even  though  in 2007, the Comprehensive National  Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) articu- lated  and  funded  defensive  programs  along four attack vectors—insider access,  proximity  access,  remote  access,  and  supply  chain  access—the  DoD  had  not  yet  implemented  technology  to  detect  and  deny  tainted  technology  brought  into  the  enterprise  by  way  of  trusted  insiders.5  Operation  Buckshot  Yankee  required the DoD to begin to configure  its sensors to look for and alert anoma-  HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012  lous behavior inside its networks.
It also  required the DoD to implement a data  loss prevention program to block illegal  data loss.
The  DoD  continues  to  suffer  from  more  than  6  million  probes  per  day  with  an  untold  number  of  success- ful intrusions against their unclassified  networks.6 Who is being held account- able for the DoD’s cyber posture?
Is it  the  DoD  Chief  Information  Officer,  the  Director  of  the  Defense  Informa- tion  Services  Agency,  or  the  Com- mander  of  United  States  Cyber  Com- mand?
And while he  may  have  been  embarrassed  by  a  for- eign  country  being  able  to  penetrate  the  armor  of  the  classified  networks,  neither the DoD nor any of its leaders  appear to have suffered any real penal- ties or repercussions.
If we are to adapt  and  adjust,  we  must  require  greater  accountability and demand leaders who  will take charge rather than sit back and  react only when necessary.
In 2011,  governments  and  corporations  alike  observed  a  new  trend  that  threatened  their  ability  to  trust  Internet  transac- tions:  the  targeting,  penetration,  and  compromise  of  companies  that  pro- duce  security  products.
In  particular,  the  weak  security  postures  of  certifi- cate authorities, including Commodo,  DigiNotar,  and  RSA,  were  exploited,  causing  a  wave  of  other  crimes  and  consequences.
Digital  certificates  rep- resent  a  second  form  of  identity  to   help  enhance  “trust”  for  financial  or  other  private  Internet  transactions  by  confirming  that  something  or  some- one is genuine.7 These certificates have  become the de-facto credential used for  secure  online  communications  and  sensitive  transactions,  such  as  online  banking  or  accessing  corporate  email  from a home computer.
In  March  2011,  RSA  informed  its  customers  of  a  breach  of  its  corpo- rate  network,  which  could  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  its  SecurID  two-factor  authentication  token.8  RSA’s  SecurID  two-factor  authentication  system  is  a  widely used digital certificate system for  remote access logins to corporate net- works  through  virtual  private  networks  and  by  many  financial  institutions  including  the  United  States  Federal  Reserve Bank.
On 21 May 2011, a lead- ing U.S. defense contractor, Lockheed  Martin,  had  its  networks  penetrated.
The  perpetrators  used  duplicates  of  RSA’s  SecurID  tokens  to  gain  access  to Lockheed’s internal network.9 After  this breach and several others resulting  from the SecurID issue, RSA leadership  stated  it  would  replace  tokens,  upon  customer  request  but  not  necessarily  free of charge.10  Another  certificate  authority  pro- vider  was  penetrated  in  June  2011.
DigiNotar’s  corporate  network  servers  were successfully penetrated and hack- ers  gained  administrative  rights  to  its  system.
These  compromises  represent  “a   [73]  LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY  threat  to  one  of  the  most  fundamen- tal  technologies  used  to  secure  online  communications and sensitive transac- tions.”12  The impact of these events is  multifold.
Second,  these companies sell security; it is their  brand.
If a security company is unwill- ing  to  invest  in  its  own  security,  then  why  should  others  invest  in  theirs?
Time  will  tell  what   the basic investment required to secure  their  own  infrastructures  and  enter- prises.
They  are  not  even  implement- ing  the  minimal  information  security  procedures  and  controls  outlined  in  the Consensus Audit Guidelines or the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  800-53,  Recom- mended  Security  Controls  for  Federal  Information  Systems  and  Organiza- tions.14  Security  vendors  should  use  these  available  resources  and  imple- ment a policy that recognizes that some  data  should  not  be  accessible  via  the  Internet  and  publicly  acknowledge  the  need  for  and  implement  better  infor- mation security controls.
From a technology perspective, these  companies  have  discovered  that  they  need  to  install  new  technologies  and  employ more vigilant processes in their  enterprises to detect anomalous behav- ior  and  continuously  monitor  their  enterprises  for  good  and  bad  activ- ity.
Additionally,  given  that  the  key  authentication  technology  used  today  has  been  compromised,  it  is  necessary   The lack of corporate leadership and accountability  for these events demonstrate that other market levers  may be needed.
From a policy perspective, certificate  authorities  in  particular  and  security  vendors in general need to get back to  security basics.
They are  failing to lead by example by not making   to  move  toward  the  research,  design,  and employment of multiple chains of  trust  for  devices,  users,  services,  and  data sources for all transactions.
In  Octo-  [74]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs    HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012  ber  2011,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  issued  a  notice  to  industry  regarding  cybersecurity,  con- firming that cyber risk and cyber intru- sion events must be reported to the SEC  and disclosed to the investing public as  risks.15  If  the  SEC  doesn’t  hold  RSA  accountable,  will  its  shareholders  and  customers do so?
It is actions like these  that  will  get  the  attention  of  corpo- rate leadership and thereby focus their  attention on adapting to address cyber  risks.
According  to  the  NIST,  “Cloud  com- puting  is  a  model  for  enabling  conve- nient,  on-demand  network  access  to  a  shared pool of configurable computing  resources [e.g., networks, servers, stor- age, applications, and services] that can  be rapidly provisioned and released with  minimal management effort or service  provider interaction.”16 The networked  environment is often measured by one  of  three  attributes:  its  ability  to  deliv- er  or  make  information  available,  its  ability  to  preserve  its  confidentiality,  and  its  ability  to  protect  its  integrity.
Cloud computing is attractive to many  businesses  and  governments  because  it  promises to make information available  to  its  customers  anywhere  and  at  any  time.
But  the  other  two  cornerstones  of  information  security—integrity  and  confidentiality—are  not  readily  com- manded by the cloud environment.
An  October 2010 report on cloud security  from  Forrester  Research,  a  consulting  and research firm, states that security is  the single biggest barrier to broad cloud  adoption.17  Citizens around the world are begin- ning  to  experience  some  of  the  chal-  lenges  with  cloud-based  services.
As  a  result,  BlackBerry  users  in  Europe,  the  Middle  East,  Africa,  India,  Brazil,  Chile,  and  Argentina  had  limited  or  no access to email, web services, and in  some  cases  voice  services.18  The  prob- lem  cascaded  when  the  backup  system,  according to RIM’s co-CEO Mike Laz- aridis, “did not work the way we intend- ed.”19  For  a  company  whose  reliability  had  consistently  helped  it  maintain  a  strong  customer  base,  RIM’s  service  outage  shook  customer  confidence.20  RIM  didn’t  deliver  on  its  promise  to  provide  reliable,  real-time  communi- cations  around  the  world,  and  cus- tomers  lost  confidence  in  the  product  and  service.
From  a  technology  point  of  view, it demonstrated the fragility of the  cloud  and  the  need  to  test  technology  prior to embedding it into core opera- tions.
It also showed the need for those  who  promise  a  24/7  service  to  have  a  graceful degrading architecture so that  customers do not suffer from a lack of   [75]  LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY  quality or continuity of service.
Recently,  LinkedIn,  e-Harmo- ny, Yahoo!, and other social network- ing sites disclosed that their systems had  been  breached  and  their  customers’  passwords and other personal identifi- able information had been stolen.
It also resulted in the  creation  of  a  new  corporate  position,  the Chief Information Security Officer  (CISO).
Many corporations, especially  those selling information services, have  personnel  responsible  for  the  secu- rity  of  their  infrastructure  and  service  offering.
LinkedIn,  whose  June  2012  data  breach  affected  nearly  6.5  mil- lion  customers,  had  neither  a  Chief  Information Officer nor a CISO.
In a  focused  inquiry  of  this  gap,  the  com- pany stated that they have a person who  is  responsible  for  the  functions  of  a  CISO.22  Yet,  LinkedIn  apparently  was  not taking the appropriate measures to  secure customer information until after  the  breach,  according  to  their  corpo- rate  blog,  when  they  instituted  addi- tional or “enhanced” security measures  by  adding  a  layer  of  technical  protec- tion.23 It remains unclear whether they  will appoint an executive who is focused  on protecting the corporation’s infra- structure and customer data.
The  Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC),  which  has  filed  suits  in  the  past  for  failure  to  protect  consumers’  personal  information, is exercising its consumer  protection and e-commerce authorities  to ensure that “companies live up to the  promises  they  make  about  privacy  and  data security.”24 Today, LinkedIn faces  at least one class action suit for failure  to properly safeguard its users’ digitally  stored  information.
Ultimately, we need proac- tive leaders to drive change and address  cyber risk early.
Weapons  and  the  Internet.
Critical  infrastructures  deliver  essen- tial  services  like  water,  electricity,  oil  and  gas,  and  sewage,  requiring  certain  components  to  be  able  to  deliver  the  product  (e.g.,  electricity)  to  the  cus- tomer  (e.g.,  business  or  household).
These infrastructures are comprised of  many  computer,  controller,  and  net- work  communications  components.
A  supervisory  control  and  data  acqui- sition  system  (SCADA)  or  industrial  control  system  (ICS)  is  at  the  heart  of  the  functionality  of  this  ecosystem,  as  it monitors and controls processes and  flows of information.
Over  the  last  decade,  industry  has  increased  connections  between  infor- mation  technology  and  control  system  networks  to  reduce  cost  and  increase  efficiency  of  systems.
Executives  acknowledge that such connections cre- ate  security  issues  because  they  have  chosen  to  shift  their  operations  from  once isolated systems to open protocols  where  individuals  and  computers  can   [76]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs    HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012  gain access to remote sites through the  use  of  modems,  wireless,  private  and  public networks, all of which are facili- tated by the Internet.
industrial control computers that were  wide  open  to  exploitation  and  digital  sabotage.28  From  a  policy  perspective,  enter- The  Stuxnet  worm  infected  more  prises  that  are  dependent  on  control  than sixty thousand computers around  systems  are  forced  to  conduct  vulner- the  world  and  was  “designed  to  pen- ability assessments and review their risk  etrate and establish control over remote  management controls (e.g., risk regis- systems  in  a  quasi-autonomous  fash- ter)  due  to  the  potential  issues  related  ion.”25 Its use resulted in the degrada- to worms, such as Flame and Stuxnet.29    tion  and  ultimate  shut  down  of  Iran’s  The  worry  is  that  the  malware  could  nuclear  facility  in  Natanz.
replicated  (e.g.,  Flame  and  DuQu),  These  same  enterprises  also  have  to  The deployment of Stuxnet raises a new set of ques- tions and...even more concerns about the future of  the Internet and Internet-based infrastructures.
In fact, security offi- cials worry that this worm will be used  again to attack other critical infrastruc- tures  that  rely  on  computers  and  have  the same security flaws.26  Finding the ICS vulnerabilities does  not require a strong industrial base or  well-financed  operations—even  a  kid  could  do  it.
As  a  young  explorer  of  the Internet, a teenage computer pro- grammer named John Matherly devel- oped  an  Internet  mapping  tool  called  Shodan.
By combining a search engine,  Google Maps, and his understanding of  the Internet, he was able to locate thou- sands  of  Internet  connected  devices  based  on  city,  country,  latitude/longi- tude, hostname, operating system, and  IP.27  He  gave  this  tool  to  his  friends,  and  they  quickly  realized  they  were  able  to  access  uncounted  numbers  of   review, create, or update their disaster  recovery  plans.
For example,  electric utilities and grid operators can  use the Cyber Security Self-Evaluation  Survey  Tool,  developed  by  the  United  States Department of Energy to “iden- tify  opportunities  to  further  develop  their  own  cyber  security  capabilities,”  by  considering  “a  series  of  questions  that focus on areas including situational  awareness  and  threat  and  vulnerability  management.”30  The  deployment  of  Stuxnet  raises  a  new  set  of  questions  and  for  many,  even more concerns about the future of  the Internet and Internet-based infra- structures.
Did  the  decision-makers  who decided to use Stuxnet consider the  consequences  of  proliferation  of  the   [77]  LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY  capability and potential re-use or retal- iatory deployment of a similar weapon?
Or were they seduced by the technology  and  ability  to  deliver  it  stealthily  over  the  Internet?
As  the  world  contin- ues  to  progress  digitally,  real  leader- ship  requires  adopting  and  embed- ding  sometimes-costly  security  solu- tions into our core infrastructures and  enterprises and stop leaving the security  of companies, governments, and indi- viduals to chance.31 Leaders in govern- ment  and  business  must  work  proac- tively to finally take steps to adapt and  adjust to where the cyber environment  already  has  evolved,  and  if  they  don’t,  they must be held accountable.
[78]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs    HATHAWAY  International Engagement on Cyber 2012  NOTES  1  Charles  Darwin,  On the Origin of Species  (London:   John Murray, 1859).
2 International Telecommunications Union, “The  World  in  2011:  ICT  Facts  and  Figures,”  Internet,  http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf.
3 Jesus Rodriguez and Diego Martinez, “The Role  of ICT in the Economic Growth and Productivity of  Andalucia,” European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Insti- tute for Prospective Technological Studies (2007): 11, Internet,  http://ftp.jrc.es/EURdoc/eur22781en.pdf.
4 William J. Lynn III, “Defending a New Domain:  The  Pentagon’s  Cyberstratgy,”  Foreign Affairs  (Septem- ber/October  2010),  Internet,  http://www.foreignaf- fairs.com/articles/66552/william-j-lynn-iii/defend- ing-a-new-domain.
5  Insider  Access:  Unauthorized  use  or  access  to  information,  systems,  and  networks  by  otherwise  trusted  agents  (employees).
The  White  House,  “The  Comprehensive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative,”  (August 2009), Internet, http://www.whitehouse.gov/ cybersecurity/comprehensive-national-cybersecurity- initiative.
See also, Melissa E. Hathaway, “Examining  the Homeland Security Impact of the Obama Admin- istration’s  Cybersecurity  Proposal,”  (Statement  for  the  Record  House  of  Representatives  Committee  on  Homeland  Security,  Sub-Committee  on  Cyberse- curity,  Infrastructure  Protection  and  Security  Tech- nologies, 24 June 2011).
6 Probe: Any attempt to gather information about  an automated information system or its on-line users.
Computer  intrusion:  An  incident  of  unauthorized  access to data or an automated information system.
7  Certificate  Authorities  issue  secure  socket  layer  (SSL)  certificates  that  help  encrypt  and  authenticate  websites and other online services.
9 Jeffrey Carr, “An Open Source Analysis Of The  Lockheed Martin Network Breach,” Digital Dao Blog, (31  May  2011),  http://jeffreycarr.blogspot.com/2011/05/ open-source-analysis-of-lockheed-martin.html.
10 Arthur W. Coviello, Jr., “Open Letter to RSA  Customers,” (March 2011), Internet, http://www.rsa.
See also, Kim Zetter, “RSA  Agrees  to  Replace  Security  Tokens  After  Admitting  Compromise,”  Wired  Magazine,  (7  June  2011),  Inter- net,  http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2011/06/rsa- replaces-securid-tokens/.
12  Symantec  Corporation,  “Symantec  Internet   Security Threat Report: 2011 Trends,” (April 2012):  13.
14 NIST develops and issues standards, guidelines,  and  other  publications  to  assist  public  and  private  institutions with managing cost effective programs to  protect  their  information  and  information  systems.
The  controls  outlined  in  the  800-53  document  include a set of management, operational, and tech- nical safeguards (or countermeasures) prescribed for  an information system to protect the confidentiality,  integrity, and availability of the system and its infor- mation.
The  CAG  outlines  best  practice  guidelines  for computer security and recommends twenty secu- rity controls that organizations should implement to  block or mitigate known attacks.
National Institute of  Standards  and  Technology,  “Information  Security,”  (August  2009).
SANS,  “Twenty  Critical  Security  Controls for Effective Cyber Consensus Audit Guide- lines,”  October  2011,  Internet,  http://www.sans.org/ critical-security-controls/cag3_1.pdf.
15  U.S.  Securities  Exchange  Commission,  “CF  Disclosure  Guidance:  Topic  No.
2,  Cybersecurity,”  (13 October 2011), http://www.sec.gov/divisions/cor- pfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm.
Material  risks  can  include  cyber  risks  and  material  events can include cyber breaches, including the theft  of  intellectual  property/trade  secrets,  penetrations  which compromise operational integrity, etc.
See also,  Melissa  Hathaway,  “Creating  the  Demand  Curve  for  Cybersecurity,”  Georgetown  Journal  of  International  Affairs.
Special Issue: International Engagement on Cyber, (Winter 2011):  165.
16 Peter Mell and Tim Grance, “The NIST Defi- nition of Cloud Computing,” (Version 15   October  2009),  Internet,  http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/ cloud-computing/cloud-def-v15.doc.
17 Jonathan Penn, “Security and the Cloud: Look- ing At The Opportunity Beyond The Obstacle,” For- rester Report, (October 2010).
“BlackBerry users revolt against  RIM as disruption spreads,” The Guardian, (11 October  2011),  Internet,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/technol- ogy/2011/oct/11/blackberry-users-revolt-against-rim.
“BlackBerry service restored  after worst outage ever,” CNN Money Tech, (13 October  2011),  Internet,  http://money.cnn.com/2011/10/13/ technology/blackberry_outage/index.htm.
20  The  fact  that  it  occurred  the  same  week  that  Apple  was  launching  its  iPhone  4S  further  compli-  [79]  LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR CYBERSECURITY  cated its situation, as RIM has struggled to keep up in  the smartphone and tablet markets.
21  Javelin  Strategy  &  Research,  “2012  Identity  Fraud Report: Social Media and Mobile Forming the  New  Fraud  Frontier,”  Internet,  https://www.javelin- strategy.com/brochure/239.
22  Eric  Chabrow,  “LinkedIn  Has  Neither  CIO  nor CISO,” Data Breach Today, (8 June 2012), Internet,  http://www.databreachtoday.com/blogs/linkedin-has- neither-cio-nor-ciso-p-1289.
23  Vincente  Silveira,  “Taking  Steps  to  Protect  Our Members,” LinkedIn Blog, (7 June 2012), Internet,  http://blog.linkedin.com/2012/06/07/taking-steps- to-protect-our-members/.
24 Federal Trade Commission, “FTC Files Com- plaint Against Wyndham Hotels for failure to Protect  Consumers’ Personal Information,” (26 June 2012),  Internet,  http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/06/wyndham.
25 James P. Farwell and Rafal Rohozinski, “Stux- net and the Future of Cyber War,” Survival 53, no.
(25  November  2010),  Internet,  http://www.thinq.co.uk/2010/11/25/stuxnet-worm- hits-black-market/.
com  28  Robert  O’Harrow  Jr.,  “Cyber  search  engine  Shodan  exposes  industrial  control  systems  to  new   risks,”  The  Washington  Post,  3  June  2012,  Internet,  http://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/cyber- search-engine-exposes-vulnerabilities/2012/06/03/ gJQAIK9KCV_story.html.
29  A  worm  is  a  destructive  program  that  repli- cates  itself  throughout  a  single  computer  or  across  a  network,  both  wired  and  wireless.
It  can  do  damage  by  sheer  reproduction,  consuming  internal  disk  and  memory  resources  within  a  single  computer  or  by  exhausting  network  bandwidth.
“Worm  Definition,”  PC  Magazine, Internet, http://www.pcmag.com/encyclope- dia_term/0,2542,t%3Dworm&i%3D54874,00.asp.
30 AOL Energy, “How Good is Your Security?
A  New DOE Tool Will Help You Find Out,” (10 July  2012),  Internet,  http://energy.aol.com/2012/07/10/ how-good-is-your-security-a-new-doe-tool-will- help-you-find-out/.
31  Jack  Goldsmith  and  Melissa  Hathaway,  “The  Cybersecurity  Changes  We  Need,”  The  Washington  Post,  (29  May  2010),  Internet,  http://www.washington- post.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/05/28/ AR2010052803698.html.
[80]    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs                                                    I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY FOR THE INFORMATION SOCIETY         United States Government Cybersecurity   Relationships   MARK D. YOUNG  *   “Securing our networks is a team sport.”  General Keith B. Alexander, USA  Director, National Security Agency  Commander, United States Cyber Command   I.
INTRODUCTION   The  United  States  federal  government  must  strengthen  its    relationships  to  better  design,  build,  manage,  and  defend  the  information  infrastructure  on  which  American  society  and  security  now  depends.
Our  lives  are  now  inextricably  tied  to  the  information  that surrounds us.
We use an ever-expanding set of devices to access  this information and to create order from the chaotic jumble of facts,  figures, downloads, and databases that confront us in our professional  and our personal lives.
The  overwhelming  nature  of  the  information  age  also  challenges    traditional governance structures.
The federal government finds itself  managing  its  interactions  with  data  that  is  growing  at  a  significant             * Executive Director, Directorate of Plans and Policy, United States Cyber Command.
This article is  derived entirely from open source material and contains no classified information.
It is  intended to depict the enduring complexity and range of issues and relationships entailed  in organizing cyber security policy and implementation at the federal level, even though the  lapse of time between writing and publication will undoubtedly render certain specific  details obsolete.
It  is  responsible  for  creating,  managing,  and  securing  a  large  portion  of  the  terabytes  of  information  needed  to  ensure  national  security, maintain diplomatic relationships with other nations, collect  taxes,  provide  benefits,  enforce  laws,  and  the  myriad  other  duties  needed for a population of more than 312 million people.
Information  networks, data storage, and management systems play a role in every  function  of  today’s  federal  government.
Driven  by  the  financial  and  access benefits of information technology, the federal government has  become  as  reliant  on  information  systems  as  the  U.S.  population,  if  not more so.
Because of this reliance on computers for governance, the federal  government  must  ensure  that  U.S.  information  systems  are  resilient  against mechanical breakdown and protected against a wide variety of  mischief-makers  who  seek  to  disable  information  networks,  whether  for the mere challenge of the exercise, or for more nefarious purposes.
the  management  and  protection  of  federal  networks  because  no  single  federal branch, department, or agency has the authority or resources  to operate and defend the interconnected systems needed to perform  government  functions.
Just  as  different  elements  of  the  government  designed and built information systems for their particular needs, the  authorities  over  these  networks  have  evolved  without  conscious  design  or  structure.
The  major  player  in  government  information  technology is not the government at all—it is the operators of the large  capacity  fiber-optic  networks  over which  the  majority  of  federal  data  flows: private sector Internet service providers.
These  private  sector  entities  have  invested  in  infrastructure  improvements  and  technology  development  at  a  rate  with  which  the  federal government cannot compete.
According to the  Congressional  Budget  Office,“[t]he  budget  deficit  in  fiscal  year  2011  will  total  nearly  $1.3  trillion.”1  With  significant  federal  budget  reductions,  government  departments  and  agencies  that  do  not  maintain strong operational relationships  with government  and non- governmental  partners  will  be  overwhelmed  by  resource  constraints,  will  mismanage  the  operation  and  protection  of  their  networks,  and  will put other systems at risk because of the interconnected nature of  information systems.
279   YOUNG   2012]      Funding  constraints  are  one  reason  for  strong  cyber  operational  relationships, but the  need  for visibility  into  the health  and  status  of  government  networks  is  another.
Multiple  federal  systems  may  be  linked  together,  but  only  the  department,  agency,  or  private  sector  owner  has  the  ability  to  monitor,  identify,  and  understand  the  performance  of  their  respective  networks.
Shared  situational  awareness  enables  the  rapid  identification  of  malicious  activity  or  unauthorized  access  across  all  systems.
A  threat  to  a  small  private  sector  Internet  service  provider  may  also  become  a  threat  to  large  federal entities because of the nature of the Internet.
Without  trusted  operational  cyber-relationships  within  the  federal  government  and  between  the  government  and  private  sector,  adequate  cyber  threat  information  sharing  will  not  happen.
Even  with  robust  operational  relationships,  a  detrimental  cyber  event  may  still  occur.
If  a  cyber  event  disrupts  the  provision  of  government  services  to  the  U.S.  population,  these  functions  must  be  restored and the loss of connectivity mitigated as quickly as possible.
A  natural  disaster  or  mechanical  failure  may  challenge  the  government’s  cyber  coordination  abilities,  but  a  traditional  military  crisis would rapidly overwhelm an unprepared government.
Although  it  is  unlikely  that  a  cyber  attack  would  stand  alone  as  a  single  adversarial action against the United States, the speed and distributed  nature of such an attack would require close coordination between the  public  and  private  sectors,  and  within  the  national  security  bureaucracy.
It  is  likely  that  information  network  capabilities  would  be used to nullify the conventional advantage of the U.S. military.
The  unique  characteristics  of  cyber  attacks2  require  operational             2 See Jonathan Masters, Confronting the Cyber Threat, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS  (2011), available at http://www.cfr.org/technology-and-foreign-policy/confronting-  cyber-threat/p15577.
The web's collaborative nature  means openness is prioritized over security.
This design feature ensures cyber defenses lag  behind offensive methods.
Finally, investigations into cyber attacks suffer from a so-called  attribution problem.
Close  federal  cyber  relationships  are  necessary  because  of  the  limited  cyber  authorities  of  each  department  and  agency,  the  limited  resources  available  to  these  departments  and  agencies  to  operate  independent  networks,  the  need  for  shared  informational  awareness,  and the need for coordinated responses to foreign cyber threats.
This  article  characterizes  the  operational  relationships  among  federal  government  organizations  with  significant  cyber  security  roles.
FEDERAL INTERAGENCY CYBERSECURITY    OPERATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS     The  Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO)  has  regularly  designated  federal  information  security  as  a  high-risk  area  since  1997.3 High-risk designations are for programs that are determined to  have  serious  weaknesses,  while  involving  significant  resources  and  providing important public services.
According to GAO:    Executive  branch  agencies,  in  particular  DHS,  also  need to improve their capacity to protect against cyber  threats  by,  among  other  things,  advancing  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capabilities,  acquiring  sufficient  analytical  and  technical  capabilities,  developing  strategies  for  hiring  and  retaining  highly  qualified  cyber  analysts,  and  strengthening  the  effectiveness  of  the public-private sector partnerships in securing cyber  critical infrastructure.4             3 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-11-278, REPORT TO CONGRESS HIGH RISK  SERIES: AN UPDATE 101 (2011), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11278.pdf.
2012]     YOUNG   281   The  departments  with  the  largest  cybersecurity  budgets  are  the  departments of Defense and Homeland Security.
“For fiscal year 2012,  the  two  [departments]  requested  a  combined  $3.4  billion  in  cyber- related  funds  (yet  to  be  approved).”5  The  cooperation  between  these  departments  was  formalized  in  a  memorandum  of  agreement  in  September  2010  permitting  the  exchange  of  personnel  to  facilitate  communication  of  each  department’s  priorities  and  improve  information  sharing.6  Relationships  between  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  and  the  private  sector  have  also  improved  with  the  establishment  of  the  National  Cyber  Investigative  Joint  Task  Force,  which aims to “coordinate, integrate, and share information related to  all  domestic  cyber  threat  investigations.”7  The  task  force  includes  eighteen  intelligence  and  law  enforcement  organizations  working  to  anticipate  and  prevent  future  cyber  exploitations  and  to  investigate  the sources of illicit network activities.
However, despite this progress,  there  are  a  number  of  challenges  to  effective  federal  interagency  operational relationships in cybersecurity.
With a total budget of  over  $3.5  trillion  in  2010,  the  federal  government  dwarfs  the  size  of  any  private  sector  organization.
Regarding Cybersecurity (Sept. 27, 2010), available at  http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/20101013-dod-dhs-cyber-moa.pdf.
7 See National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force, FED.
8 BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS, U.S. DEP’T OF LABOR, CAREER GUIDE TO INDUSTRIES, 2010- 11 EDITION, available at http://www.bls.gov/oco/cg/cgs041.htm (last visited Mar.
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   282    Service  workers).9  Each  of  the  federal  branches,  departments,  and  agencies  has  at  least  one  network  it  uses  to  communicate  and  to  execute its responsibilities.
Second, exact statistics on how many networks are operated by the    federal  departments  are  difficult  to  find.10  This  makes  knowing  how  many  connections  exist  between  the  Internet  and  government  networks difficult to estimate.
The Department of Homeland Security  oversees the management of an unknown number of civilian executive  branch  networks.
The  Department  of  Defense  oversees  the  management  of  15,000  military  networks.11  The  number  of  connections  between  different  networks  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  network,  the  transactions  supported  by  the  network,  the  in- house  applications  on  different  networks,  and  data-flow  efficiencies.
Thus,  there  may  be  a  single  connection  or  multiple  connections  between  any  two  individual  networks.
Under  the  Trusted  Internet  Connections  initiative  announced  in  November  2007,  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  sought  to  standardize  and  secure  links  between  individual  federal  networks  and  external,  non-federal  networks—including  the  Internet.12  In  January  2008,  the  number  of  these  connections  was  reported  to  be  more  than  4,300.13  If  each  of  these  connections  is  estimated  to  be  associated  with  only  ten  networks—a  conservatively  low  number—then  the  department  would  be  responsible  for  operating  and  defending  more  than  43,000  networks.
10 A network is the entire infrastructure, organization, personnel, and components for the  collection, processing, storage, transmission, display, dissemination, and disposition of  information.
JOINT CHIEF OF STAFF, DEP’T OF DEFENSE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DICTIONARY  OF MILITARY AND ASSOCIATED TERMS 161, JP 1-02 (2012), available at  http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp1_02.pdf (defining information system).
13 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., TRUSTED INTERNET CONNECTIONS (TIC) INITIATIVE:  STATEMENT OF CAPABILITY EVALUATION REPORT 2 (2008) available at  http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/egov_docs/2008_TIC_SOC_ EvaluationReport.pdf.
2012]      The  Department  of  Defense  has  described  in  great  detail  the  information  systems  for  which  it  is  responsible.
According  to  the  former Deputy Secretary of Defense:   YOUNG   283   Information  technology  enables  almost  everything  the  U.S.  military  does:  logistical  support  and  global  command  and  control of  forces, real-time  provision  of  intelligence, and remote operations.
Every one of these  functions  depends  heavily  on  the  military's  global  communications  backbone,  which  consists  of  15,000  networks  and  seven  million  computing  devices  across  hundreds  of  installations  in  dozens  of  countries.
More  than  90,000  people  work  full  time  to  maintain  it.
In  less  than  a  generation,  information  technology  in  the  military  has  evolved  from  an  administrative  tool  for  enhancing  office  productivity  into  a  national  strategic  asset  in  its  own  right.
The  U.S.  government's  digital  infrastructure  now  gives  the  United  States  critical  advantages  over  any  adversary,  but  its  reliance  on  computer networks also potentially enables adversaries  to gain valuable intelligence about U.S. capabilities and  operations,  to  impede  the  United  States'  conventional  military forces, and to disrupt the U.S. economy.14   The  U.S.  government  remains  configured  in  an  Industrial  Age  structure.
There  have  been  incremental  advancements  in  the  use  of  information technology, but these changes have been institutionalized  in  isolated  contexts  without  regard  for  the  benefits  of  a  unifying  strategic  vision.
Our  current  circumstances  present  evolving  and  exponentially  increasing  cyber  threats  to  federal  systems,  including  unauthorized access to personally identifiable information,15 data theft  or  exploitation,  unauthorized  access  to  government  data,  and  cyber  and financial crimes.
15 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-08-536 1, PRIVACY: ALTERNATIVES EXIST  FOR ENHANCING PROTECTION OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION (2008), available  at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08536.pdf (Personally identifiable information  includes any information about an individual maintained by an agency, including (1) any  information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, such as name,  Social Security number, date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, or biometric  records; and (2) any other information that is linked or linkable to an individual, such as  medical, educational, financial, and employment information.).
The  government  has  established  some  operational  relationships  among  federal  entities  with  cybersecurity  responsibilities,  and  there  is  limited  effort  to  improve  collaboration  and  information  sharing  with  the  private  sector.
Through  intelligence  and  law  enforcement  activities,  and  the  knowledge needed to merely operate large information networks, the  federal  government  has  extensive  data  about  the  status  of  individual  networks,  malicious  activity  on  these  networks,  and  the  criminal  activity  that  may  be  facilitated  through  these  networks.
Information  sharing  its  value  and  produce  understanding.
After  the  attacks  of  September  11,  2001,  the  9/11  Commission  stated,  “[t]he  U.S.  government  has  access  to  a  vast  amount  of  information.
When  databases  not  usually  thought  of  as  ‘intelligence,’  such  as  customs  or  immigration  information,  are  included,  the  storehouse  is  immense.”16  The  same  may  be  said  for  cyber  threat  information.
“The  biggest  impediment  to  all-source  analysis—to a greater likelihood of connecting the dots—is the human  or systemic resistance to sharing information.”17    Anxiety over the loss of prosecutorial advantage, the compromise  of intelligence sources and methods, and civil liability for the private  sector  has  precluded  the  sharing  of  information  among  federal  branches,  department,  and  agencies—and  between  the  government  and the private sector.
is  necessary  to  capitalize  on      While  investment  banks,  defense  contractors,  and  other  critical  infrastructure  owners  have  information  about intrusions into their own systems and networks,  they  fear  enforcement  actions  by  regulators,  suits  by  plaintiffs’ lawyers, and criticism associated with public  disclosure  of  security  failures.
Concerns  such  as  these  make  to  share  information with the federal government.
While federal  agencies know that their networks should be protected  in many of the same ways that private sector networks   these  private  entities  reluctant             16 NAT’L COMM’N ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE U.S., THE 9/11 COMMISSION REPORT  416-17 (2004).
2012]     YOUNG   285   are,  concerns—including  the  opposition  of  privacy  advocates to technology that sniffs traffic in and out of  government systems—have slowed progress.18     Fear of the loss of departmental resources and authority, and the  perceived  need  to  control  information  in  and  about  federal  agencies,  encourages  unilateral  approaches  to  federal  network  operations  and  defense.
The Center of Strategic and International Studies reported on  the unsatisfying progress in U.S. cybersecurity:   Unsurprisingly,  protecting  “turf”  played  a  role  [in  slowing  cybersecurity  progress].
Cyber  functions  are  scattered  across  the  executive  branch.
Reorganization  could mean that some offices would have to surrender  control.
Turf  concerns  intertwine  with  the  conceptual  dispute  over  innovation, economics, and the nature of the Internet.
little  interest  in  The  cabinet  agencies  also  have  supporting  a  in  cybersecurity,  their  independence.19   stronger  White  House  as   it  would   diminish   role   The incremental efforts made by the government are necessary but    remain  insufficient,  particularly  when  cyber  threats  are  increasingly  sophisticated  and  numerous,  and  when  it  is  likely  that  federal  funds  will  be  significantly  reduced.
According  former  Defense  Department  official  Franklin  Kramer,  although  the  current  efforts  to  improve  integrated  governmental strategy to meet that challenge has only begun and has  yet fully to take shape.”20 Operational relationships are not yet mature  enough  to  adequately  address  the  loss  of  resources,  the  loss  or   federal  cybersecurity  are  welcome,   “an   to             18 Gus P. Coldebella & Brian White, Foundational Questions Regarding the Federal Role in  Cybersecurity, 4 J.
OF NAT’L SECURITY L. AND POL'Y 233, 236-37 (2010).
FOR STRATEGIC AND INT’L STUDIES, COMM’N ON CYBERSECURITY FOR THE 44TH  PRESIDENCY, CYBERSECURITY TWO YEARS LATER 4 (2011), available at  http://csis.org/files/publication/110128_Lewis_CybersecurityTwoYearsLater_Web.pdf.
20 FRANKLIN D. KRAMER, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, CYBER SECURITY: AN INTEGRATED  GOVERNMENTAL STRATEGY FOR PROGRESS (2010), available at  http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/Cyber%20Security- %20An%20Integrated%20Governmental%20Strategy%20for%20Progress.pdf.
caused  by   inadequate  network   [Vol.
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   286    corruption  of  data,  or  the  unauthorized  access  to  national  security  systems  security  measures.
Government  defense  contractors  continue  to  lose  terabytes  of  data,  U.S.  critical  infrastructure  remains  unprotected,  and  operational  relationships  are  not  strong  enough  to  engender  trust  among  federal  organizations and between the public and private sectors.
the  cybersecurity  roles  and  missions  of  some  of  the  departments  and  agencies  within  their  relationships  with  other  parts  of  the  government  will  be  followed  by  recommendations as to how to improve these relationships for better  cybersecurity for the United States.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY   Established  by  the  Homeland  Security  Act  of  2002,  the    Department of Homeland Security assimilated more than twenty-two  federal  agencies  to  better  protect  the  United  States  from  terrorism.21  The department has multiple cybersecurity budget lines and activities.
Two  of  the  most  active  organizations  within  DHS  reside  within  the  National Protection and Programs Directorate.
The Office of Infrastructure Protection coordinates terrorism risk- reduction efforts for U.S. critical infrastructure.22 It requested $322.3  million for fiscal year 2012 operations.23 Within this office is the Office  of  Cybersecurity  and  Communications,  which  oversees  the  “security,  resiliency,  and  reliability  of  the  nation’s  cyber  and  communications  infrastructure.”24  The  department  requested  $614.2  million  in  fiscal  year 2012 operations.25              21 See Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub.
25 Homeland Security Act of 2002, supra note 21.
Other items within this budget include: $233.6 million to  accelerate EINSTEIN 326 deployment to prevent and detect intrusions  on  computer  systems,  and  to  upgrade  the  National  Cyber  Security  Protection  System,  building  an  intrusion  detection  capability  and  analysis  capabilities  to  protect  federal  networks;  $40.9  million  to  support  the  department’s  efforts  to  strengthen  federal  network  security of large and small agencies by conducting an estimated sixty- six  network  assessments  to  improve  security  across  the  federal  executive branch; $24.5 million to provide high-quality, cost-effective  virtual  cybersecurity  education  and  training  to  develop  a  robust  cybersecurity  workforce;  $1.3  million  to  enable  DHS  to  coordinate  national  cybersecurity  operations  and  interface  with  the  U.S.  Department  of  Defense’s  (DoD)  National  Security  Agency  (NSA)  at  Fort  Meade,  Maryland;  and  $18  million  for  the  Comprehensive  research  and  National  Cybersecurity  development  projects  the  nation’s  cybersecurity.27     The  department’s  budget  request  for  cybersecurity  activities  is  large  because  DHS  has  such  broad  responsibilities  in  protecting  the  nation’s cyber and critical infrastructure.
The Secretary of Homeland  Security is responsible for “coordinating the overall national effort to  enhance the protection of the critical infrastructure and key resources  of  the  United  States”  and  serves  “as  the  principal  federal  official  to  lead,  integrate,  and  coordinate  implementation  of  efforts  among  federal  departments  and  agencies,  State  and  local  governments,  and  the  private  sector  infrastructure  and  key  resources.”28  Although  Homeland  Security  Presidential  Directive  7  (HSPD  7)  acknowledges  that  other  departments  and  agencies  have   focused  on  strengthening   to  protect  critical             26 See generally Gov’t Accountability Office, GAO-11-881, Department of Homeland  Security: Progress Made and Work Remaining in Implementing Homeland Security  Missions 10 Years after 9/11 136 (2011), available at  http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11881.pdf.
(EINSTEIN 3 is intended to be an intrusion  prevention system that is to automatically detect and respond appropriately to cyber  threats before harm is done.).
28 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., HOMELAND SECURITY PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVE 7 (2003)  [hereinafter HSPD 7], available at  http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/laws/gc_1214597989952.shtm.
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   288    cybersecurity roles, the Department of Homeland Security is the “focal  point for the security of cyberspace” for the federal government.29     In its first Quadrennial Homeland Security review, DHS described  its  mission to secure cyberspace by preventing malicious actors  from  “effectively  exploit[ing]  cyberspace,  impair[ing]  its  safe  and  secure  use,  or  attack[ing]  the  Nation’s  information  infrastructure.”30  To  achieve  this  goal,  DHS  must  “[i]dentify  and  evaluate  the  most  dangerous  threats  to  federal[,]civilian[,]  and  private-sector  networks  and  the  Nation;"  “[p]rotect  and  make  resilient  information  systems,  networks,  and  personal  and  sensitive  data;"  "[p]revent  cyber  crime  and  other  malicious  uses  of  cyberspace;"  “[d]isrupt  the  criminal  organizations  and  other  malicious  actors  engaged  in  high- consequence  or  wide-scale  cyber  crime;"  “[d]evelop  a  robust  public- private  cyber  incident  response  capability;"  and  “[m]anage  cyber  incidents  from  identification  to  resolution  in  a  rapid  and  replicable  manner with prompt and appropriate action.”31    To  manage  its  broad  role,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  has  developed  a  set  of  guiding  principles  to  focus  the  nation’s  response  to  various  potential  events.
This  National  Response  Framework32 contains multiple incident annexes that address “specific  contingency  or  hazard  situations  or  an  element  of  an  incident  requiring specialized application of the Framework.”33    The  Cyber  Incident  Annex  describes  the  responsibilities  of  different  governmental  groups  to  “prepare  for,  respond  to,  and  recover  from  any  cyber-related  Incident  of  National  Significance             29 Id.
(“To the extent permitted by law, Federal departments and agencies with cyber  expertise, including but not limited to the Departments of Justice, Commerce, the  Treasury, Defense, Energy, and State, and the Central Intelligence Agency, will collaborate  with and support the organization in accomplishing its mission.”).
30 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., QUADRENNIAL HOMELAND SECURITY REVIEW 54 (2010),  available at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/qhsr_report.pdf.
28, 2012)  (The current annexes are: Biological Incident, Catastrophic Incident, Food and Agriculture  Incident, Mass Evacuation, Nuclear/Radiological Incident, Cyber Incident, Terrorism  Incident Law Enforcement and Investigation.).
YOUNG   289   2012]    impacting  critical  national  processes  and  the  national  economy.”34  A  "cyber-related  Incident  of  National  Significance"  is  undefined,  but  may  include  an  “organized  cyber  attack,”  a  widespread  computer  virus,  a  “natural  disaster  with  significant  cyber  consequences,”  or  other  incidents  “capable  of  causing  extensive  damage  to  critical  infrastructure  of  key  assets.”35  The  Annex  outlines  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  federal  departments  categorized  as  "Coordinating  Agencies, Cooperating Agencies, and Other Federal Entities.
"36 In the  event  of  a  nationally  significant  cyber-related  the  Department  of  Defense,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security,  and  the  Department  of  Justice  are  coordinating  agencies  and  the  Departments  of  Commerce,  Energy,  Homeland  Security,  State,  Transportation, and Treasury are all cooperating agencies.37    In addition to the National Response Framework’s Cyber Incident  Annex, DHS has drafted the National Cyber Incident Response Plan to  establish the “framework for organizational roles, responsibilities, and  actions  to  prepare  for,  respond  to,  and  begin  to  coordinate  recovery  from  a  cyber  incident.”38  This  plan  is  intended  to  expand  upon  the  information  within  the  NRF’s  Cyber  Incident  Annex.
incident,             34 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., CYBER INCIDENT ANNEX CYB-2 (2004), available at  http://www.learningservices.us/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrp_cyberincidentannex.pdf.
AGENCY, NATIONAL RESPONSE FRAMEWORK,  EMERGENCY SUPPORT FUNCTION ANNEXES: INTRODUCTION (2008), available at  http://www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nrf/nrf-annexes-all.pdf (Federal agencies  designated as coordinating agencies are responsible for implementation of processes  detailed in the annexes.
Coordinating agencies support the Department of Homeland  Security (DHS) incident management mission by providing the leadership, expertise, and  authorities to implement critical and specific aspects of the response.
In accordance with  Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5, DHS retains responsibility for overall  domestic incident management.
37 The Intelligence Community, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and  the Office of Management and Budget are also listed as cooperating agencies.
38 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN, INTERIM VERSION,  1 (2010).
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   290      Despite  the  progress  made  by  DHS  with  the  as-yet-unapproved  National  Cyber  Incident  Response  Plan  and  the  cyber  annex  to  the  National Response Framework, the operational relationships between  DHS  and  other  remain  underdeveloped.
DHS’s  National  Cybersecurity  and  Communications  Integration  Center  (NCCIC)  does  not  detail  personnel  to  operations  centers  maintained  by  the  Department  of  Defense.39  There  is  limited  cooperative  training  between  the  DoD  and  DHS  for  cybersecurity  personnel  and  there  is  limited  information  sharing  between  the  two  departments,  despite  the  memorandum  of  agreement  signed  by  the  secretaries of both departments.
federal  departments  and  agencies   DHS’s  National  Cyber  Security  Division  within  the  Office  of  Cybersecurity  and  Communications  created  the  U.S.  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US-CERT)  in  2003  to  secure  federal  information  networks  by  coordinating  the  “defense  against  and  response to cyber attacks.”40 It is the federal government’s focal point  for  interaction  with  executive  branch  and  nonfederal  entities  on  computer  network  “analysis,  warning,  information  sharing,  major  incident  response,  and  national-level  recovery  efforts.”  According  to  the Government Accountability office:   is   aggregating   charged  with   [US-CERT]  and  disseminating  cybersecurity  information  to  improve  warning  of  and  response  to  incidents,  increasing  coordination  of  reducing  vulnerabilities,  and  protection.
In  addition,  the  organization  is  to  collect  incident  reports  from  all  federal  agencies  and  assist  agencies  in their incident  response efforts.
It is also to  accept  incident  reports  when  voluntarily  submitted  by   enhancing  prevention   response   information,   and             39 National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) is a 24x7  center responsible for the production of a common operating picture for cyber and  communications across the federal, state, and local government, intelligence and law  enforcement communities and the private sector.
The NCCIC is operated within DHS’  Office of Cybersecurity and Communications, a component of the National Protection &  Programs Directorate.
About the National Cybersecurity and Communications  Integration Center (NCCIC), DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC.,  http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/gc_1306334251555.e (last visited Mar.
40 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GEN., U.S. COMPUTER EMERGENCY  READINESS TEAM MAKES PROGRESS IN SECURING CYBERSPACE, BUT CHALLENGES REMAIN 2  (2010) [hereinafter GAO, CHALLENGES REMAIN], available at  http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/OIG_10-94_Jun10.pdf.
2012]     YOUNG   291   other  public  and  private  entities  and  assist  them  in  their response efforts, as requested.41     US-CERT is a federal entity independent from the more than 250  global  emergency  teams  addressing  cyber  incidents,  including  the  CERT®  Coordination  Center  (CERT/CC)  at  Carnegie  Mellon’s  Software  Engineering  Institute.42  US-CERT  does  not  have  the  statutory  or  regulatory  authority  to  enforce  compliance  with  its  notices  for  mitigation of  cyber  threats.
Additionally,  according to  the  DHS  Inspector  General,  “US-CERT  does  not  have  sufficient  staff  to  perform its 24x7 operations as well as to analyze security information  timely.”43     Its  operational  relationships  with  federal  departments  and  agencies  and  the  private  sector  is  hindered  because  of  inadequate  information  sharing  based  on  security  classification,  network  configuration,  and  training  issues.
Other  federal  agencies  claim  that  US-CERT  is  “unable  to  share  near  real-time  data  and  classified  and  detailed information to address security incidents.”44 Additionally, the  different networks operated by other departments and the intelligence  community challenge information sharing from US-CERT.
Because of  classification limitations, US-CERT is limited in the information it can  post  to  its  portals.
Many  agencies  do  not  have  classified  networks  or  secure facilities or personnel with the proper clearances to receive the  information.
DHS  operational  relationships  would  be  if  the  department  had  a  strategy  to  achieve  its  cybersecurity  roles  and  missions.
But  DHS’s  Office  of  Cybersecurity  and  Communications  has  not  developed  “a  strategic   improved             41 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-08-588, CYBER ANALYSIS AND WARNING: DHS  FACES CHALLENGES IN ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE NATIONAL CAPABILITY 14-15  (2008), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08588.pdf.
42 See About Us, US-CERT, http://www.us-cert.gov/aboutus.html (last visited Jan. 23,  2012) (The first of these types of organizations was the CERT Coordination Center  (CERT/CC), established at Carnegie Mellon University in 1988.
When the Department of  Homeland Security (DHS) created US-CERT, it called upon the CERT/CC to contribute  expertise for protecting the nation's information infrastructure by coordinating defense  against and response to cyber attacks.
Through US-CERT, DHS and the CERT/CC work  jointly on these activities.).
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   292    implementation  plan  that  outlines  its  responsibilities  or  establishes  specific  objectives  and  milestones  for  enhancing  cybersecurity  or  protecting critical infrastructures.”45   To improve the ability to work with other federal departments and    agencies,  DHS  should  obtain  the  authority  to  enforce  guidance  from  US-CERT,  recruit  and  retain  adequate  staff  to  fulfill  US-CERT’s  mission,  and  establish  a  strategic  implementation  plan  documenting  its  priorities  to  secure  federal  civilian  information  networks  and  critical  infrastructures.
If  implemented, these recommendations would put DHS on the road to  improved  collaboration  and  better  information  sharing  with  other  parts of the federal government.
SECRET SERVICE     Reporting  directly  to  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security,  the  Secret  Service  is  responsible  for  safeguarding  the  U.S.  financial  infrastructure in order to “preserve the integrity of the economy, and  to  protect  national  leaders,  visiting  heads  of  state  and  government,  designated  sites  and  National  Special  Security  Events.”46  The  USA  Patriot  Act  required  the  Secret  Service  to  establish  an  Electronic  Crimes  Task  Force  in  order  to  prevent,  detect,  mitigate,  and  investigate  attacks  on  U.S.  critical  infrastructures.
The  establishment  of  the  task  force  was  prescient  considering  the  impact  on  the  Dow  Jones  Industrial  Average  after  a  trading algorithm malfunctioned in May 201047 and the February 2011  cyber attack against NASDAQ OMX Group, Inc.
The NASDAQ attack   systems  and   financial             45 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GEN., PLANNING, MANAGEMENT, AND  SYSTEMS ISSUES HINDER DHS' EFFORTS TO PROTECT CYBERSPACE AND THE NATION'S CYBER  INFRASTRUCTURE (Redacted) 9 (2011), available at  http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/OIGr_11-89_Jun11.pdf.
YOUNG   293   2012]    was serious enough to eventually involve the National Security Agency  and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.48    The  popularity  and  proliferation  of  information  technology  has  enabled  criminals  to  target  financial  systems,  “compelling  the  involvement  of  the  Secret  Service  in  combating  cyber  crime.”49  The  unauthorized  access  into  NASDAQ  OMX—a  global  exchange  company—resulted in the insertion of “suspicious files” onto NASDAQ  servers.
Although  commodities  trading  systems  were  unaffected,  the  intruders  accessed  cloud  applications  containing  data  stored  by  a  significant number of Fortune 500 companies and providing access to  “a rich mine of market-moving, inside information.”50 There is a clear  role  for  a  strong  organizational  element  to  monitor  and  protect  U.S.  financial  systems  against  cyber  criminals,  hackers,  and  state  competitors.
Also  within  the  Secret  Service  is  the  National  Threat  Assessment  Center (NTAC), which provides assessments “within the Secret Service  and  to  its  law  enforcement  and  public  safety  partners.”  This  organization  researched  “illicit  insider  cyber  activity”  because  this  type  of  activity  often  involves  criminal  activity  such  as  “financial  fraud,  computer  identity  theft,  and  computer-based  attacks  on  the  nation's  financial,  banking  and  telecommunications  infrastructures.”51  Partnering  with  Carnegie  Mellon  University's  CERT®  Coordination  Center,  NTAC  examined  past  instances  in  which  current  or  former  employees  or  contractors  harmed  their  organizations  “via  a  computer  or  system/network  for  purposes  of  intellectual  property  theft,  fraud,  and  acts  of  sabotage.”  NTAC’s  study  identified  physical,  social,  and  online  activity  that  indicates  an  insider  threat.
The  report  identified  behaviors  in  the   fraud,  electronic  crimes,             48 See generally Uri Friedman, Why the Financial World Is Spooked by Nasdaq Cyber  Attack, THE ATLANTIC WIRE (February 7, 2011), http://www.theatlanticwire.com/business/  2011/02/why-the-financial-world-is-spooked-by-nasdaq-cyber-attack/21203.
8:2   information  technology  and   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   294    banking  and  financial  sector,  the  telecommunications sector, and the government sector.52     The Secret Service has informational awareness into systems that  might not be the traditional vectors of a cyber attack.
Its relationships  with  the  private  financial  sector  make  the  Secret  Service  the  best  candidate  to  share  information  from  and  with  the  financial  services  industry.
With  the  ability  to  deal  with  sensitive  and  classified  information,  it  does  not  face  some  of  the  challenges  as  do  other  Department  of  Homeland  Security  elements  such  as  US-CERT.
DHS  should  better  leverage  the  Secret  Service  to  gain  better  visibility  into  the status of network operations and malicious activity known by the  financial industry.
JOINT COORDINATION ELEMENT     In September 2010, the Department of Homeland Security and the  Department  of  Defense  established  a  memorandum  of  agreement  under  which  both  departments  will  “provide  personnel,  equipment,  and  facilities  in  order  to  increase  interdepartmental  collaboration  in  strategic  planning  for  the  nation's  cybersecurity,  mutual  support  for  cybersecurity  capabilities  development,  and  synchronization  of  current  operational  activities.”53  The  memorandum  established  a  Joint  Coordination  Element  to  improve  “joint  synchronization,  requirement  translation,  and  other  DHS  mission  support  for  homeland  security  for  cybersecurity”  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  [DHS]  Director,  Cybersecurity  Coordination.54  The  Joint  Coordination  Element  for  departmental  collaboration, but remains understaffed and underutilized.
cybersecurity  mission   the  best  vehicle   operational   planning,   coordination,   is   Testimony by Philip Reitinger, then the Deputy Undersecretary of  the  National  Protection  and  Programs  Directorate  before  the  Senate  Homeland Security Committee, in May 2011 strongly implied that the  Joint Coordination Element remained long on promises and short on             52 See id.
53 Memorandum of Agreement to Enhance Coordination to Secure America’s Cyber  Networks, DEP'T OF HOMELAND SEC.
He  stated  that,  while  the  DoD  had  “unparalleled  technical  expertise  and  cyber  security  expertise  built  up  over  the  course  of  years,”  DHS  has  expertise  in  the  interagency  process.55  Reitinger  noted  that  DHS  will  be  developing  people  to  send  to  the  National  Security  Agency’s  (NSA)  Threat  Operations  Center (NTOC).
He  noted  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  and  Communications  Integration  Center  (NCCIC)  will  accept  personnel  from  NSA  and  the  United States Cyber Command, suggesting that individuals have yet to  be  integrated  into  this  cyber  watch  center.
The  Joint  Coordination  Element  thus remains  a promising collaborative concept  that  has  yet  to be fully leveraged for the benefit of U.S. cybersecurity.
The  interdepartmental  agreement  identified  an  often-overlooked    element of cybersecurity: cyber acquisition.
Given Moore’s Law56 and  the  rapid  pace  of  technology  development,  traditional  federal  acquisition  practices  are  insufficient.
The  inadequacy  of  DoD  cyber  acquisition practices was noted in the National Defense Authorization  Act  for  fiscal  year  2011.57  This  act  required  “a  strategy  to  provide  for  the  rapid  acquisition  of  tools,  applications,  and  other  capabilities  for  cyber  warfare  for  the  United  States  Cyber  Command  and  the  cyber  operations components of the military departments.”58 The agreement  between  the  two  departments  acknowledges  this  need  by  requiring  DHS to send personnel to the National Security Agency to collaborate  on acquisition and technology development.
The Joint Coordination Element  is a good first step for improved  collaboration  and  a  strong  operational  relationship  between  the  two  departments  with  the  largest  cyber-  responsibilities  and  the  largest             55 Obama Administration Global Cybersecurity Plan: Hearing Before the Senate  Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, 112th Cong.
56 See DOROTHY E. DENNING, INFORMATION WARFARE AND SECURITY 294-95 (1999) (For the  past several decades, the number of transistors that can be placed on a single [micro  processing] chip has approximately doubled every eighteen months owing to advances in  manufacturing.
To  realize  the  full  potential  of  the  JCE,  both  departments  should  make  staffing  the  joint  organization  with  knowledgeable  personnel  from  each  of  them  a  high  priority.
Both  departments  may  consider  making  a  tour  in  the  JCE  a  requirement  for  selection  to  particular  ranks  or  for  selection  for  particular  positions.
Both  departments  should  consider  providing  more  public  information  on  the status of the Joint Element.
V. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE      “As  a  doctrinal  matter,  the  Pentagon  has  formally  recognized  cyberspace as a new domain of warfare.”59 The 2011 National Military  Strategy describes the department’s perspective on cyberspace:   develop   new   cyber   enable   capabilities   Cyberspace  Combatant  Commanders to operate effectively across all domains.
Strategic  Command  and  Cyber  Command  will  collaborate  with  U.S.  government  agencies,  non- government entities, industry, and international actors  to  capabilities,  organizations,  and  skills.
Should  a  large-scale  cyber  intrusion  or  debilitating  cyber  attack  occur,  we  must  provide a broad range of options to ensure our access  and use of the cyberspace domain and hold malicious  actors  accountable.
We  must  seek  executive  and  Congressional  action  to  provide  new  authorities  to  enable effective action in cyberspace.60   norms,     The Defense Department operates its own worldwide information  network,  known  as  the  Global  Information  Grid  (GIG).
The  GIG  is  a  “globally  interconnected,  end-to-end  set  of  information  capabilities  for  collecting,  processing,  storing,  disseminating,  and  managing  information  on  demand  to  warfighters,  policy  makers,  and  support             59 Lynn, supra note 11, at 101.
YOUNG   297   logistical   support,  provide   2012]    personnel.”61  It  includes  networks  and  systems  that  are  government- owned and leased from the private sector.
Without these information  networks, DoD would be unable to command and control its military  forces,  provide  intelligence  or  communicate.
DoD  has  an  information  architecture  that  includes  “15,000  networks  and  seven  million  computing  devices  across  hundreds  of  installations  in  dozens  of  countries.”62  According  to  the  Unified  Command  Plan—the  document  describing  the  responsibilities  of  the  department’s  combatant  commands—U.S.
Strategic  Command  is  responsible  for  coordinating  cyberspace  operational  planning  and  directing  GIG  operations  and  defense.63  As  a  subordinate  unified  command,64  United  States  Cyber  Command  was  established  in  2009  to  organize,  plan,  and  conduct  activities  to  direct  the  operations  and  defense of specified Department of Defense information networks; to,  “when  directed,  cyberspace  operations” in order to enable actions in all domains; and to “ensure  U.S.  and  allied  freedom  of  action  in  cyberspace,  while  denying  the  same to our adversaries.”65    full-spectrum  military   conduct             61 U.S. DEP’T OF DEF., DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DIRECTIVE 8000.01, MANAGEMENT OF THE  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INFORMATION ENTERPRISE 10 (2009), available at  http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/800001p.pdf.
Commanders of subordinate unified commands  have functions and responsibilities similar to those of the commanders of unified  commands and exercise operational control of assigned commands and forces within the  assigned operational area.).
65 United States Cyber Command Fact Sheet, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND,  http://www.stratcom.mil/factsheets/Cyber_Command (last visited Mar.
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   298      It  has  been  reported  that  the  Defense  budget  request  for  cybersecurity  operations  is  $3.2  billion  for  fiscal  year  2012.66  This  request  will  fund  improved  information  assurance  for  DoD  agencies  and  “non-information  assurance  initiatives  that  are  critical  to  the  department's  cyber  stance.”  This  large  funding  request  pays  for  DoD  public  key  infrastructure,  communications  security,  military  cyber  operations,  cyber  research  and  technology,  and  forensic  analysis  conducted by the Defense Cyber Crime Center.67    This impressive funding illustrates the priority the Department of  Defense  places  on  cybersecurity.
This  effort  is  good  for  national  security,  but  DoD  is  but  one  part  of  the  national  cybersecurity  establishment.
The  federal  government  must  continue  to  improve  internal government and external partner operational relationships to  better  address  the  threats  and  consequences  of  cyber  conflict.
According to  the American Forces Press Service, the Defense Industrial Base (DIB)  Cyber  Pilot  involves  sharing  classified  threat  information  with  participating  defense  contractors  or  with  the  companies’  Internet  service  providers.68  According  to  Lynn,  “the  government  will  not  monitor,  intercept  or  store  any  private-sector  communications  through the program.” The intelligence provided by DoD merely helps  the DIB companies “to identify and stop malicious activity within their  networks.”69 The Department of Homeland Security is a partner in the  DIB Cyber Pilot.
This  pilot  program  is  the  singular  example  of  how  DOD  cyber    capabilities can assist organizations outside the Defense Department.
It  is  admittedly  easier  for  the  department  to  work  with  the  defense  industrial  base  companies  with  which  it  has  had  relationships  for  decades  than  to  extend  its  protections  beyond  traditional  defense             66 Aliya Sternstein, Pentagon Seeks $3.2 Billion for Revised Cyber Budget, NEXTGOV.COM  (Mar.24, 2011), http://www.nextgov.com/nextgov/ng_20110324_2474.php?oref=rss.
68 John D. Banusiewicz, Lynn Outlines New Cybersecurity Effort, AMERICAN FORCES PRESS  SERV.
More  programs  like  the  DIB  Cyber  Pilot  should  be  developed  to  leverage  the  experience  and  prior  investment  made  to  mature  defense  cyber  capabilities.
Lynn  made  a  similar  claim  earlier  this year stating that the “DIB Cyber Pilot could serve as an example of  how  a  larger  effort  aimed  at  protecting  the  nation’s  critical  infrastructure—its power grid, transportation system, financial system  and other components—might work.”70   The  DIB  Cyber  Pilot  and  the  Joint  Coordination  Element  should    inform  how  DoD  capabilities  can  be  leveraged  to  protect  networks  beyond  its  own.
The  debate  about  how  DoD  capabilities  can  inform and assist non-DoD cybersecurity efforts should be conducted  openly  and  frequently.
According  to  the  Center  for  Strategic  and  International Studies, “an executive order or some other presidential  document  to  guide  military  and  intelligence  activities  in  protecting  critical infrastructure” would be the most visible and public statement  of leveraging well-developed military capability to defend the nation’s  networks.
“Since any decision will require working with those outside  the  government,  a highly-classified, un-releasable  document,  like  the  2008  Comprehensive  National  Cyber  Initiative  (CNCI),  will  be  inadequate.”71    Despite  DoD’s  recognized  technical  expertise,  the  general  public  appears resistant to allowing DoD to protect the nation by defending  non-DoD information networks.72 DoD has  an image problem.
“Even  if  existing  legal  authorities  allow  for  an  expanded  DoD  role  in  defending  critical  infrastructure,  the  ‘perception  problem’  remains  significant.”73  Those  resistant  to  a  larger  role  for  the  military  in  protecting  civilian  networks  are  motivated  by  concerns  for  civil  liberties and privacy.
In a recent report, the CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the  44th Presidency noted, “We do not advocate changing  the traditional             70 Id.
72 See generally, Michael Hardy &John Zyskowski, DOD Cyber Defense Plan Draws Fire,  FEDERAL COMPUTER WEEK (June 21, 2011), http://fcw.com/articles/2011/07/25/buzz- cyber-defense-plan-panned.aspx; Declan McCullagh, U.S. Military Wants to “Protect” Key  Civilian Networks, CNET NEWS (July 14, 2011), http://news.cnet.com/8301-31921_3- 20079500-281/u.s-military-wants-to-protect-key-civilian-networks.
Finding  a  way  to  do  this  in  partnership  with  DHS  and  the  private  sector  remains  a  fundamental  challenge for cybersecurity policy.”74 The United States cannot afford  the  resources  to  recreate  the  capabilities  that  have  already  been  developed for the military.
DoD’s  approach  to  cybersecurity  is  appropriate,  but  weaknesses  remain.
These include the lack of an adequately trained and abundant  cyber  workforce.
There  are  only  so  many  trained  cyber  professionals  available for the federal government, and only some have gone to the  better-resourced  Defense  Department.
The  military  has  a  maturing  and  systemic  approach  to  developing  professional  specialties  in  cybersecurity  disciplines  and  will  mature  training  to  produce  highly- skilled  network  operators  to  defend  military  networks.
This  will  contribute  to  the  comprehensive  cybersecurity  of  the  nation  if  these  maturing  professionals  rotate  to  other  departments  and  agencies.
DHS  has  far  fewer  analysts  and  cyber  professionals  with  the  same  levels  of  security  clearance  as  held  by  DoD.
Without  more  cleared  personnel,  information  sharing  between  DHS  and  DoD  is  limited.
Without  a  faster  mechanism  information  and  make  decisions,  with  appropriately  cleared  and  well-trained  personnel,  the  benefits  of  the  DHS-DoD relationship will be lost.
Beyond the need for larger numbers of skilled cybersecurity forces  and  professionals,  the  Defense  Department  must  carefully  consider  the  desire  to overly  classify  specific capabilities  and  strategies.
Cyber  warfare planning would benefit if more operations could be discussed  at  lower  levels  of  classification.
“While  there  are  good  reasons  to  highly  classify  and  compartment  some  cyber  matters,  there  is  such  significant  over-classification  and  compartmentation  that  planning  and  operational  integration  is  (sic)  overly  difficult.”75  Some  of  this  over-classification is based on the intelligence sources from which the  Defense  establishment  learns  its  cyber  threat  information.
The  method  by  which  the  intelligence  community  derives  this  threat  intelligence is highly-classified, leading to a derivative classification of  the cyber countermeasures or techniques.
UNITED STATES CYBER COMMAND     Within  the  Department  of  Defense  there  are  multiple  elements  that participate in the department’s cyber policy or operations.76 This  article  focuses  mainly  on  the  operational  military  cyber  element,  United  States  Cyber  Command.
This  military  organization— subordinate  to  United  States  Strategic  Command77—“plans,  coordinates,  integrates,  synchronizes,  and  conducts  activities  to:  direct the operations and defense of specified Department of Defense  information  networks  and;  prepare  to,  and  when  directed,  conduct  full-spectrum  military  cyberspace  operations  in  order  to  enable  actions  in  all  domains,  ensure  US/Allied  freedom  of  action  in  cyberspace and deny the same to our adversaries.”78    The  command  is  co-located  with  the  National  Security  Agency  (NSA) at Fort George G. Meade, Maryland.
The benefits of co-locating  Cyber  Command  with  NSA  have  been  described  by  General  Keith  Alexander, Commander of Cyber Command and the Director of NSA:   [Former Secretary  of  Defense]  Gates  has  said  we  can’t  afford  to  replicate  the  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars  that  we’ve  put  into  NSA  to  build  another  architecture  for  Cyber  Command  and  then  yet  others  for  different  government  agencies.
Instead,  we  need  to  leverage  existing investment and work collaboratively.
NSA and  Cyber  Command  have  separate  staffs  and  operate  under different authorities.
The capabilities of NSA and  its  work  intelligence  and   the  signals   force   in             76 Office of the Secretary of Defense (responsible for coordinating the memorandum of  agreement with the Department of Homeland Security), Office of the Deputy Assistant  Secretary of Defense for Cyber Policy (supports the “Under Secretary of Defense for Policy  and Assistant Security Defense for Global Strategic Affairs by developing and overseeing  the implementation cyber-related policies, strategies, and plans to promote stability in and  ensure continued freedom of access to the global commons of space and cyber in order to  achieve national security objectives.” See Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of  Defense for Cyber Policy, OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ASSISTANT SEC'Y OF DEF.
FOR CYBER POL'Y,  http://policy.defense.gov/gsa/cp/index.aspx (last visited Feb. 22, 2012).
77 United States Strategic Command is responsible for nuclear capabilities, space  operations, global missile defense, and global command, control, communications,  computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.
78 U.S. Cyber Command Public Affairs Fact Sheet, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND,  http://www.stratcom.mil/factsheets/Cyber_Command (last visited Jan. 23, 2012).
8:2   information  assurance  fields  are  unsurpassed.
Cyber Command is a  military command that draws its authorities from Title  10, but it relies on the success of real-time intelligence,  which is why the decision to collocate it with NSA was  not only wise, but also an imperative.79      Establishing  the  military  command  with  NSA  reflects  a  national  security  compromise  between  capitalizing  on  NSA’s  technical  resources, the need to centralize military cyber activities, and a desire  to  “balance  legally-defined  mission  boundaries  between  the  civilian  intelligence  community  and  the  military  defense  community.”80  The  most notable difficulty with the co-location of the command and NSA  is  the  distinction  between  the  military  Title  10  authority  of  the  Commander  for  Cyber  Command  and  the  intelligence  Title  50  authority  of  the  NSA  Director.81  Some  observers  appear  to  disregard  the  potential  authority  conflicts  and  believe  that  Cyber  Command’s  establishment  is  the  most  significant  improvement  for  federal  cybersecurity.82    The  benefits  of  interagency—or  at  least  multi-agency  advanced  planning cannot be overstated.
“Hurricane Katrina demonstrated how  after-the-event  coordination  and  planning  was  both  untimely  and  inadequate in dealing with the immediate aftermath of the disaster.”83  Delays  in  interagency  management  can  have  significant  operational  consequences  not  only  in  a  natural  disaster,  but  also  in  national  security  scenarios.
Effective  coordination  between  Cyber  Command  and NSA is necessary but not sufficient in the event of a national cyber             79 Harrison Donnelly, Q&A: General Keith B. Alexander, MILITARY INFO.
80 James Barkley, Kevin Campbell & Joseph Roybal, Interagency Coordination @ Net  Speed: Recommendations to Maximize Interagency Coordination and Capabilities at U.S.  Cybercom, May 23, 2010, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University  (quoting RICHARD A. CLARK & ROBERT K. KNAKE, CYBER WAR 34–44 (2010)) (on file with  the author).
Cyber Command must provide a priori analysis  to  the  national  security  community  about  the  resources  and  manpower that are required to address a significant cyber event.
DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY   “national  nuclear   capabilities—including     The  Defense  Information  Systems  Agency  (DISA)  is  a  combat  support  agency  providing  services  to  the  U.S.  military  and  its  allies  with  information  networks  and  global  communications.
DISA  provides  “joint  and  coalition  enterprise  infrastructure,  information  sharing  services,  and  command  and  control  that  enable  joint  warfighting.”  Employing  more  than  7,300  civilian  and  military  personnel,  the  agency  operates  and  maintains  military  networks  and  integrated  command  capabilities.”84  It  is  responsible  for  the  “.mil”  network,  systems  engineering,  and  interoperability  testing,  including  “electromagnetic  spectrum  planning,  coordination,  deconfliction,  and  management  services”  for  the  Defense  Department.85  DISA’s  appropriated  budget  was over $2.5 billion for fiscal year 2011.86     The  importance  of  DISA’s  contribution  to  U.S.  military  power  is  often underestimated.
An example of the important work done by the  agency  is  the  Network  Services  directorate.
This  organization  “translates  customers'  long-haul  network  requirements  into  effective  voice,  video  and  data  network  solutions;  leverages  proven  and  emerging  technologies  to  ensure  joint  interoperability,  assured  security  and  best  value;  evaluates  technical  operations;  and  resolves  technical  support  issues  for  DoD's  long-haul  networks.”87  It  is  also  responsible  for  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  military’s  unclassified network,88 the military secret  network,89 and the various  military Network Operations Centers90 around the world.
86 Defense Information Systems Agency SNAPSHOT: A Summary of Facts and Figures,  DEF.
88 Network, Networking Technology, Data Communication Terms, Glossary and  Dictionary: NIPRNET: Non-secure Internet Protocol Router Network, JAVVIN NETWORK     I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   304      One of the priorities highlighted in the DISA Campaign Plan is the  protection  of  “critical  in  DISA  and  the  Global  Information  Grid  (GIG).”91  Given  the  number  of  unauthorized  intrusions  into  Defense  Department  networks,  protecting  military  information  that  transits  on  military  networks  has  become  an  operational  imperative.
8:2   current   The  environment  mandates  comprehensive and integrated cyber protection for this  infrastructure  to  ensure  the  DoD  has  protected  information  on  protected  networks.
The  DISA  is  conducting a massive effort to improve the security and  defense  capabilities  of  our  military  networks.
These  include:  improved  sensors  for  intrusion  detection  and  reporting;  demilitarized  security;  filtering;  and  developing  proxys  to  protect  our  core  network services from internet threats.92    (DMZ)   world   zones                                                                                                                       MANAGEMENT AND SECURITY, http://www.javvin.com/networkingterms/NIPRNET.html  (last visited Apr.
89 Secret Internet Protocol Router Network: (SIPRNET Network Security Plan),  http://www.docstoc.com/docs/14976132/Secret-Internet-Protocol-Router-Network (last  visited Apr.
90 The Global Network Operations and Security Center (GNOSC) provides situational  awareness of the myriad of networks, systems and applications that make up the Global  Information Grid (GIG) and protect/defend that grid from potential cyber threats.
Additionally, the GNOSC performs a Command Center function that provides a wide  variety of support to the Defense Information Systems Agency’s (DISA) core mission areas.
The Global Information  Grid is the terms once used to describe the globally interconnected, end-to-end set of  information capabilities, and associated processes for collecting, processing, storing,  disseminating, and managing information on demand to warfighters, policy makers, and  support personnel.
The Global Information Grid includes owned and leased  communications and computing systems and services, software (including applications),  data, security services, other associated services and National Security Systems.
305   YOUNG   2012]    An  examination  of  DISA’s  budget  request  yields  mixed  results  given  the  importance  of  network  defense  in  a  time  of  growing  threats— particularly  to  military  systems.
DISA  arranges  its  resources  into  six  mission areas.93 The “GIG Network Operations and Defense” mission  area covers the operation, protection, defense, and sustainment of the  “enterprise  infrastructure  and  information  sharing  services  which  enable  Command  and  Control.”94  Yet,  the  funding  for  this  mission  area  has  been  reduced  from  $517  million  in  fiscal  year  2011  to  $445  million in fiscal year 2012.95     This  reduction  may  not  indicate  DISA’s  lack  of  prioritizing  network security, as only two of the six operations funded under GIG  Network Operations and Defense resource line were actually reduced.
These  two  missions  are  to  ensure  “critical  mission  execution  in  the  face  of  cyber  attacks”96  and  “develop  and  implement  Cybersecurity  plans,  assessments,  and  strategies  .
.”97  It  is  significant  to  note,  however,  that  DISA’s  funding  for  support  of  the  Defense  Industrial  Base  (DIB)  grew  by  more  than  $5  million  from  FY11  to  FY12.
This  activity  provides  “information  assurance/computer  network  defense  support  to  the  DIB  through  rapid  dissemination  of  cyber  threat,  vulnerability, and analysis information.”98 It is “devoted exclusively to  cyber indications and warning, intrusion detection, incident  analysis,  incident  response, information sharing/knowledge management, and  planning.”99    DISA’s mission is clearly critical to the overall cybersecurity of the  United  States.
Without  reliable  military  command  and  control  and  communications  infrastructure,  the  ability  for  the  U.S.  to  use  its  superior military force is diminished.
(Transition to Net Centric Environment, Eliminate Bandwidth Constraints,  GIG Network Operations and Defense, Exploit the GIG for Improved Decision Making,  Deliver Capabilities Effectively/Efficiently).
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY AND THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY   [Vol.
8:2     As a member of the Intelligence Community, the National Security  Agency  (NSA)  collects,  analyzes,  and  produces  “signals  intelligence  information  and  data  for  foreign  intelligence  and  counterintelligence  purposes  to  support  national  and  departmental  missions.”100  With  respect  to  cybersecurity,  the  Director  of  NSA  is  also  the  National  Manager  for  National  Security  Systems  and  responsible  to  the  Secretary of Defense for the protection of national security systems.101     There  has  always  been  tension  between  operational  combat  commanders  and  the  intelligence  organizations  that  support  them.
Consequently,  military  organizations have traditionally viewed the operational  branch,  the  fighting  forces,  as  their  central  concern  at  all times.102      Military  commanders  demand  certainty  and  predictability.
In  a  paper  concerning  the  Intelligence  Community’s  performance  in  Afghanistan,  the  then-Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for  Intelligence  for  the  International  Security  Assistance  Force  in  Afghanistan  said  that  “because  the  United  States  has  focused  the  overwhelming majority of collection efforts and analytical brainpower  on insurgent groups, our intelligence apparatus still finds itself unable  to answer fundamental questions about the environment in which we  operate and the people we are trying to protect and persuade.”103              100 Exec.
YOUNG   307   it  also   2012]      Because NSA is an agency within the Department of Defense and  because it is now co-located with a cyber combat command, there may  be tensions between the operational priorities of Cyber Command and  those of the NSA.
Despite these potential tensions, as discussed above,  there is great wisdom in co-locating Cyber Command with NSA.
The  National  Security  Agency  is  the  world’s  preeminent  signals  intelligence organization.104 Not only is it responsible for the collection  and  analysis  of  foreign  diplomatic,  military,  and  commercial  communications,  but  is  charged  with  securing  U.S.  communications  from  interception.
Part  of  the  agency’s  mission  includes  enabling  “Computer  Network  Operations  (CNO)  in  order  to  gain  a  decision  advantage  for  the  Nation  and  our  allies  under  all  circumstances.”105     An example of the cybersecurity benefits derived from NSA is the  Department  of  Homeland  Security’s  EINSTEIN  program.
Under  this  program, the Department of Homeland Security is partnering with an  Internet service provider to test technology that detects unauthorized  intrusions  into  government  computer  systems  using  capabilities  developed by the National Security Agency.106 The automation of this  malware detection is meant to prevent attacks before damage is done  to federal information systems or data is stolen or manipulated within  federal  databases.
“EINSTEIN  3's  predecessors  focused  on  intrusion  detection, allowing analysts to scan records of connections to agencies’  systems  and  use  signatures  to  scan  network  traffic  for  cyber  threats.
EINSTEIN  3  would  add  the  ability  to  prevent  those  intrusions.”107  This  effort  will  improve  DHS’s  information  sharing  by  providing  an  automated  process  for  alerting  other  agencies  about  network intrusions.
As  illustrated  by  the  EINSTEIN  technology,  NSA  and  the    intelligence community may have insight into the working of terrorist  organizations  that  seek  to  damage  U.S.  interests  using  the  Internet.
(Signals intelligence includes communications intelligence and electronic  intelligence).
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   308    According  the  Congressional  Research  Service,  “Terrorist  organizations exploit the Internet medium to raise awareness for their  cause,  to  spread  propaganda,  and  to  inspire  potential  operatives  across  the  globe.
Websites  operated  by  terrorist  groups  can  contain  graphic  images  of  supposed  successful  terrorist  attacks,  lists  and  biographies of celebrated martyrs, and forums for discussing ideology  and methodology.”108 The global reach and resident analytical skill of  the  intelligence  community—including  NSA—provides  enormous  advantage to U.S. cybersecurity.
Under the National Cyber Incident Response Plan, the intelligence  community  tasked  with  providing  advanced  warning  and  characterization of a cyber attack.
In concert with the Department of  Defense,  the  intelligence  community  will  “characterize  the  cyber  threat  and  attribution  of  attacks  and  to  forestall  future  incidents.”109  Intelligence  agencies  are  also  tasked  with  establishing  situational  awareness with DHS and “other partners” and to share intelligence on  threats in and from cyberspace with the private sector and “especially  the critical infrastructure and key resources (CIKR) community.”110     The  Department  of  Defense  and  the  intelligence  community  operate under some distinct legal authorities however.
This is  both a  benefit and a liability in terms of cybersecurity.
It  is  a  question  of  time.”  He  noted  that  the  timing  of  this  attack  is  unknown  and  that  he  cannot  predict  if  this  event  will  be  against  “commercial  infrastructure,  government  networks  or  mobile  platforms.”111    A  cyber  conflict  may  be  inevitable,  but  the  Defense  Department  does not possess the inherent legal authority or capacity to respond to  all  cyber  threats  unilaterally.
SERV., R41674, TERRORIST USE  OF THE INTERNET: INFORMATION OPERATIONS IN CYBERSPACE 3 (2011), available at  http://www.carlisle.army.mil/dime/documents/Terroist%20Use%20of%20Internet%20I O.pdf.
109 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN, E-1 (2010)  [hereinafter NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN], available at  http://www.federalnewsradio.com/pdfs/NCIRP_Interim_Version_September_2010.pdf.
111 Donna Miles, Alexander Cites Need for Greater Cyber Defenses, AMERICAN FORCES  PRESS SERV., (Sept. 13, 2011), available at  http://www.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=65321.
309   YOUNG   2012]    focus all instruments of national power against current and emerging  cyber  threats.112  DoD  currently  has  no  authority  to  guard  networks  other than the GIG.
Yet, threats to the U.S. may pass through multiple  other networks, foreign and domestic, before putting DoD at risk.
Despite the technical  brilliance resident at NSA, the agency and the intelligence community  must  develop  close  relationships  with  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security to execute a unified homeland defense strategy.
Both  the  Defense  Department  and  the  intelligence  community  must  protect  information  systems  that  are  required  to  perform  their  missions.
Both federal elements know how to detect cyber intrusions,  protect  essential  networks,  and  respond  to  threats  to  U.S.  interests.
According  to  Franklin  Kramer,  however,  “the  technical  solutions  for  securing civilian infrastructure vulnerability and espionage are either  not  available  or  not  well  understood.”113  Kramer  notes  that  the  “creation  of  an  effective  technical  architecture  with  adequate  situational  awareness,  resilience  and  interoperability  will  be  a  significant challenge.”114     The weakness of the intelligence community and NSA  is  cultural.
The  multi-billion  dollar  intelligence  community  produces  the  most  sensitive information available to the government and, therefore, has  many  more  personnel  with  higher  security  clearances.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE     As  the  key  source  of  legal  guidance  within  the  executive  branch,  the  Justice  Department  is  a  necessary  partner  in  U.S.  cybersecurity,  especially  because  clear  laws  governing  some  unique  aspects  of  cybersecurity  have  yet  to  be  written.
Although there may  be a sufficient number of attorneys with military experience, very few  of  them  have  military  cyber  experience.
This  limits  their  ability  to  provide  guidance  for  and  participate  in  discussions  of  cyber  conflict  and the emerging authorities for cyber-operational relationships.
The  Justice  Department  will  have  to  explore,  debate,  and  determine  adequate  legal  guidance  for  a  federal  government  that  relies  on  information networks to provide for the U.S. population.
Some  estimate  the  cost  of  cyber crime to be in the hundreds of billions of dollars.115 Operational  relationships  between  the  Departments  of  Homeland  Security,  Defense,  and  Justice  are  critical  because  “there  is  not  necessarily  a  bright line between national security and criminal objectives: the well- known  [December  2009]  attack  on  Google  may  be  an  exemplar  of  a  hybrid situation.”116   IX.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY     The  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  is  a  Department  of  Commerce  non-regulatory  agency  and  “provides  standards  and  technology  to  protect  information  systems  against  threats to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information  and  services.”117  NIST’s  Computer  Security  Division  encourages  “broad  sharing  of  information  security  tools  and  practices,”  and  “provides  a  resource  information  security  standards  and  guidelines.”118    for             115 See generally NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN, supra note 109.
117 Computer Security Resource Center, NAT’L INST.
OF STANDARDS AND TECH.,  http://www.nist.gov/itl/csd/csrc.cfm (last visited Jan. 23, 2012).
YOUNG   311   fulfills   the   2012]      NIST’s  Computer  Security  Division  institute’s  responsibilities  under Title  III of  the  E-Government  Act,  entitled  the  Federal  Information  Security  Management  Act  of  2002  (FISMA).119  Under its FISMA authorities, the Computer Security Division drafted  FISMA  compliance  guides,  “provided  specifications  for  minimum  security  requirements  for  federal  information  systems,”  and  reviewed  “security  policies  and  technologies  from  the  private  sector  and  national  security  systems  for  potential  federal  agency use.”120    NIST has a vital role to play at the nexus of U.S. government and  the private sector.
By statute, “NIST is directed to offer support to the  private  sector  for  the  development  of  precompetitive  generic  technologies121 and the diffusion of government-developed innovation  to  users  in  all  segments  of  the  American  economy.”122  Title  15  also  directs NIST to “develop and test standard interfaces, communication  protocols,  and  data  related  telecommunications systems,”123 to “study computer systems and their  use to control machinery and processes,”124 and to “perform research   information  and   computer  and   structures   for             119 FISMA the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) requires each  federal agency to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security  program.
The law assigns specific responsibilities to agency heads, chief information  officers, and Inspectors General.
It also assigns OMB and the National Institute of  Standards and Technology (NIST) with responsibilities for oversight and guidance.
The  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is responsible for overseeing agency information  security policies and practices, including developing and overseeing guidance on  information security and overseeing compliance.
NIST is tasked with developing standards  and guidance for implementation of FISMA requirements by federal agencies.
(See U.S.  GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-07-528, INFORMATION SECURITY: SELECTED  DEPARTMENTS NEED TO ADDRESS CHALLENGES IN IMPLEMENTING STATUTORY  REQUIREMENTS (2007)).
120 The Computer Security Division Responds to the Federal Information Security  Management Act of 2002, COMPUTER SCIENCE DIV., NAT’L INST.
OF STANDARDS AND TECH.,  http://csrc.nist.gov/about/index.html (last visited Jan. 23, 2012).
SERV., CRS Report 95-36, THE ADVANCED  TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM 2 (2005), available at  http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/crs/95-36.pdf (high-risk [research] .
CRS 95-30, THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF  STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY: AN APPROPRIATIONS OVERVIEW 1 (2011), available at  http://assets.opencrs.com/rpts/95-30_20110425.pdf; see also 15 U.S.C.
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   312    to develop standards and test methods to advance the effective use of  computers and related systems and to protect the information stored,  processed, and transmitted by such systems and to provide advice in  support  of  policies  affecting  Federal  computer  and  related  telecommunications systems.”125    FISMA  provides  government-wide  requirements  for  information  security that supersede the Government Information Security Reform  Act  and  the  Computer  Security  Act.
“Except  for  national  security  systems  as  defined  by  FISMA,  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  is  responsible  for  prescribing  standards  and  guidelines  pertaining  to  Federal information systems on the basis of standards and guidelines  developed by NIST.”126    NIST  and  the  National  Security  Agency  cooperatively  evaluate  information  technology  conformance  with  international  standards  under  the  National  Information  Assurance  Partnership  (NIAP).
This  cooperative  effort  is  the  NIAP  Common  Criteria  Evaluation  and  Validation  Scheme  for  IT  Security  (CCEVS).
It  is  a  public-private  partnership  to  “help  consumers  select  commercial  off-the-shelf  information  technology  (IT)  products  that  meet  their  security  requirements  and  to  help  manufacturers  of  those  products  gain  acceptance in the global marketplace.”127    Although NIST is a vital player in the cybersecurity game, divided  authorities may hobble the federal government’s ability to adequately  secure  essential  information  and  critical  U.S.  networks.
The  Department  of  Homeland  Security  “working  with  [NIST]  and  [the  Office of Management and Budget]—defends all ‘.gov’ space; and DoD  defends  all  of  the  intelligence  networks.”128  No  federal  organization  helps  protect  commercial  networks  “where  our  policy  is  to  rely  on  some  combination  of  individual action, encouragement, leadership by example, and faith in  market forces.”129   ‘.mil’  space   for  military  and             125 Id.
OF STANDARDS & TECH., GUIDELINE FOR IDENTIFYING AN  INFORMATION SYSTEM AS A NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM 5 (2003), available at  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-59/SP800-59.pdf.
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH   Considerations  of  the  complexities  surrounding  the  cybersecurity  of  legislative  branch  networks  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  article;  however,  since  there  are  connections  between  the  networks  of  both  branches,  a  few  issues  should  be  mentioned.
Given  the  complicated  cybersecurity  relationships  within  the  executive  branch,  it  is  easy  to  overlook  the  important  role  the  legislative  branch  plays  in  setting  funding  and  policy  for  U.S.  cybersecurity.
According  to  Stephen  Dycus:   the   lack   Congress obviously cannot act alone to develop a cyber  warfare  policy  for  the  United  States.
Its  members  and  staff  technical  expertise,  agility,  and  organization to wield this  new, evolving weaponry.
Especially  in  the  matter  of  cyber  warfare,  where  the  diplomatic  and  strategic  stakes  are  potentially  as  high  as  they  are  in  any  kinetic  conflict,  Congress  has  a  critical  role  to  play.
The  solution  to  this  apparent  conundrum  may  be  found  in  a  close  collaboration  between  the  political  branches  in  the  planning  and  implementation of rules for cyber warfare.130   Professor Dycus makes the point that U.S. cyberspace actions are still  governed by law.
If the nation suffers a significant cyber event that is  determined to be an armed attack under the United Nations Charter,  the  “United  States’  laws  and  rules  must  govern  the  United  States’  response—and,  in  particular,  the  relationship  between  the  executive  branch  and  the  Congress.
An  appropriate  declaratory  policy,  as  has  been  used  with  respect  to  other  types  of  potentially  serious  attacks,  could  help  create  a  common  executive  branch-congressional  understanding.”131             130 Stephen Dycus, Congress’s Role in Cyber Warfare, 4 J. NAT'L SECURITY L. & POL'Y 155  (2010).
NON-FEDERAL SECTOR CYBERSECURITY    OPERATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS     External  operational  relationships  are  more  relevant  and  important  when  the  United  States  is  faced  with  a  potential  cyber  conflict.
The  relationships  between  the  U.S.  government  and  the  private  sector  are  critical  because  the  private  sector  is  more  likely  to  notice a cyber attack before it affects U.S. systems.
Ninety-eight  percent  of  government  communications,  including  classified  data,  travel over “civilian-owned-and-operated networks and systems.”132     According  to  the  Intelligence  and  National  Security  Alliance,  the  relationship between the private sector and the federal government is  insufficient  to  secure  U.S.  critical  infrastructure.
Government  and  private cybersecurity efforts remain uncoordinated, allowing malware  to  spread  “undetected  to  any  location  benefiting  from  the  near  absence of security between independent network owners.
Multiple  advisory  committees  and  partnerships  with  private  industry  are  involved  in  cybersecurity.
The  Center for Strategy and International Studies points to DoD’s Defense  Industrial Base Cyber Pilot  and the Enduring Security Framework as  two of the few successful partnerships in government.
Their success is   There  are  evolving  efforts   for  coordination  between   that  attempt             132 Eric Talbot Jensen, Cyber Warfare and Precautions Against the Effects of Attacks, 88  TEX.
of Nat’l  Intelligence, from his Keynote Address at the Texas Law Review Symposium: Law at the  Intersection of National Security, Privacy, and Technology).
ALLIANCE, ADDRESSING CYBER SECURITY THROUGH  PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP: AN ANALYSIS OF EXISTING MODELS (2009), available at  http://www.insaonline.org/assets/files/CyberPaperNov09R3.pdf.
315   YOUNG   2012]    based on the “high-level participation by all parties and the existence  of binding contractual relationships.”134    The  private  sector  continues  to  struggle  with  the  costs  of  improving  security  for  its  information  and  networks.
According  to  Larry  Clinton  of  the  Internet  Security  Alliance,  “Many  companies  don’t see an adequate [return on investment] to cyber investments.”135  The  lack  of  an  adequate  business  case  to  encourage  greater  cybersecurity  creates  regulatory  dilemmas.
Melissa  Hathaway136  has  offered  three  options  for  steepening  the  “demand  curve  for  cybersecurity.”137  She  recommends  that  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  propose  a  rule  governing  the  thresholds  of  information  security risk.
This would demonstrate the SEC’s interest in corporate  information on company information security safeguards.138     Second,  Hathaway  recommends  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  require  the  “core  telecommunications  providers  and  [internet  service  providers]...shoulder  more  of  the  burden  of  protecting  our  infrastructure.”  The  private  sector  often  tells  the  government that private firms are better positioned than government  agencies  to detect and mitigate cyber threats.
If this  is the case, then  the  government  should  endorse  the  cyber  capabilities  of  the  private  sector  and  capitalize  on  the  “unparalleled  visibility  into  global  networks” of the ISPs.139              134 Coldebella & White, supra note 18, at 4.
135 Examining the Homeland Security Impact of the Obama Administration’s  Cybersecurity Proposal: Hearing Before H. Subcomm.
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure  Protection, and Sec.
Technologies, 112th Cong.
(2011) (testimony of Larry Clinton,  President & CEO, Internet Security Alliance), available at http://homeland.house.gov/  sites/homeland.house.gov/files/Testimony%20Clinton%20Amended.pdf.
136 President of Hathaway Global Strategies and senior adviser at the Harvard Kennedy  School's Belfer Center led President Obama's Cyberspace Policy Review as National  Security Council acting senior director for cyberspace.
Hathaway also led the development  of the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative in the Bush White House.
137 See generally MELISSA HATHAWAY, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, ISSUE BRIEF: CREATING THE  DEMAND CURVE FOR CYBERSECURITY (2010), available at http://www.acus.org/files/  publication_pdfs/403/121610_ACUS_Hathaway_CyberDemand.pdf.
138 MELISSA HATHAWAY, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, ISSUE BRIEF: CREATING THE DEMAND CURVE  FOR CYBERSECURITY 2 (2010), available at http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/  403/121610_ACUS_Hathaway_CyberDemand.pdf.
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   316      Third, the Federal Trade Commission has appropriate authority to  “protect  and  educate  consumers  and  businesses  on  the  fundamental  importance  of  good  information-security  practices.”140  Through  the  application of a warning banner or notice message, online consumers  can  be  informed  of  the  risk  they  are  assuming  by  conducting  e- transactions.
The  new  regulation  requires  public  companies  to  report  “significant  instances  of  cybertheft  or  attack,  or  even when they are at material risk of such an event.”142   A.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY    AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR   The  Homeland  Security  Act  of  2002  assigned  the  following     responsibilities for the protection of critical infrastructure to DHS:   ?
developing  a  comprehensive  national  plan  for  resources  and  critical   securing  infrastructures of the United States;    the  key   ?
recommending  measures  to  protect  the  key  resources  and  critical  infrastructures  of  the  United  States  in  coordination  with  other  groups; and                 140 Id.
142 Ellen Nakashima & David S. Hilzenrath, Cybersecurity: SEC Outlines Requirement  That Companies Report Cyber Theft and Attack, WASH. POST, Oct. 14, 2011,  http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/cybersecurity-sec-outlines- requirement-that-companies-report-data-breaches/2011/10/14/gIQArGjskL_story.html;  see also DIV.
2 CYBERSECURITY (2011), available at  http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm.
disseminating,  as  appropriate,  information  to  the  deterrence,  prevention,  and  terrorist   assist  preemption  of  or  attacks.143    in   response   to   DHS  communicates  with  the  private  sector  primarily  through  the  Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centers  (ISACs).
Yet,  “[f]requent  reliance  on  cooperative  councils,  like  the  ISACs,  has  produced little more than the repetitive refrain that government can’t  share  intelligence  with  the  private  sector  and  the  private  sector  sees  little to gain by sharing with the government.”144    The  strength of DHS’s relationship with  the private  sector  is  that  DHS  has  provided  a  venue  to  share  information,  which  is  necessary  but not sufficient.
Private  sector  motivation for sharing information with the government is reduced by  the monetary risk of releasing proprietary information to competitors  and the potential liability of releasing customer date, if sued.
Private sector firms are not subject  to Freedom  of  Information  Act  (FOIA)  requests  for  information,  but  under  the  current  legal  regime  any  information  provided  to  the  government,  if  not  subject  to  a  FOIA  exemption—national  security,  for  example— could be released to the public.
Within  DHS,  the  National  Protection  and  Programs  Directorate  oversees  the  Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  for  Cybersecurity  and  Communications.
The  office  uses  three  divisions145  to  “prevent  or  minimize  disruptions  to  [U.S.]  critical  information  infrastructure  in  order  to  protect  the  public,  economy,  government  services,  and  the  overall security of the United States.” The CS&C Office seeks to reduce             143 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-10-628 , CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE  PROTECTION: KEY PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CYBER EXPECTATIONS NEED TO BE CONSISTENTLY  ADDRESSED 7 (2010), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d10628.pdf.
144 Paul Rosenzweig, The Organization of the United States Government and Private  Sector for Achieving Cyber Deterrence, in DETERRING CYBER ATTACKS: INFORMING  STRATEGIES AND DEVELOPING OPTIONS FOR U.S. POLICY 244, 266 (2010).
145 See National Communications System, NAT’L CYBER SECURITY DIV.
OFFICE OF  EMERGENCY COMMC’S, http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/gc_1185202475883.shtm  (last visited Feb. 2, 2012) (The three divisions are the National Communications System,  the National Cyber Security Division, and the Office of Emergency Communications.).
8:2   I/S: A JOURNAL OF LAW AND POLICY   318    cyber  vulnerabilities,  guard  against  cyber  intrusions,  and  anticipate  potential threats.146    However, according to a DHS Inspector General Report from June  2011,  CS&C  has  not  adequately  addressed  cybersecurity  risks.
The  office  has  yet  to  craft  a  strategic  implementation  plan  to  address  the  recommendations  to  Secure  Cyberspace,147  or  to  accomplish  the  objectives  established  by  the  National  Infrastructure  Protection  Plan  or  the  Comprehensive  National  Cyber  Security  Initiative.
According  to  the  IG,  “Although  progress has been made in building relationships with the public and  private  sectors,  raising  cybersecurity  awareness,  and  implementing  education  and  outreach  programs,  much  work  remains  to  protect  cyberspace  from  vulnerabilities and exploits.”148   the  National  Strategy   critical   infrastructures   from   and   the  Nation’s   B.
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND THE DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL BASE     The  Defense  Department  has  its  own  relationships  with  a  small  portion  of  the  private  sector  known  as  the  Defense  Industrial  Base.
“Through  a  public-private  partnership  called  the  Enduring  Security  Framework (ESF), the chief  executive officers  and  chief technology officers of major information technology and defense             146 Office of Cybersecurity and Communications, U.S. DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC.,  http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/gc_1185202475883.shtm (last visited Jan. 23,  2012).
147 See THE NATIONAL STRATEGY TO SECURE CYBERSPACE (2003), available at  http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/cyberspace_strategy.pdf.
The National Strategy to  Secure Cyberspace outlined a framework for both organizing and prioritizing efforts.
It  provides direction to the federal government departments and agencies that have roles in  cyberspace security.
It also identifies steps that state and local governments, private  companies and organizations, and individual Americans can take to improve our collective  cybersecurity.
The  document provides a framework for the contributions that we all can make to secure our  parts of cyberspace.
The dynamics of cyberspace will require adjustments and amendments  to the Strategy over time.
148 DEP’T OF HOMELAND SEC., OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GEN., PLANNING, MANAGEMENT,  AND SYSTEMS, ISSUES HINDER DHS' EFFORTS TO PROTECT CYBERSPACE AND THE NATION'S  CYBER INFRASTRUCTURE (Redacted) 13 (2011), available at  http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/OIGr_11-89_Jun11.pdf.
YOUNG   319   2012]    companies  now  meet  regularly  with  top  officials  from  DHS,  ODNI,  and DoD.”149    The  benefits  of  this  relationship  are  faster  identification  and  application  of  commercial  best  practices  from  top  industry  leaders.
The  ESF  addresses  how  the  “technological,  operational,  and  political  factors  introduce  exposure  for  the  U.S.  and  opportunity  for  our  adversaries, identify the means to manage the risk profile for the U.S.  and its allies in this environment, and address today’s risk and provide  a  permanent  forum  for  continued  engagement  in  tomorrow’s  technology marketplace.”    The  downsides  are  similar  to  those  in  the  ISACs—a  limited  government  ability  to  share  classified  information  with  the  private  sector  and  the  private  sector’s  limited  inclination  to  share  with  government  due  to  its  proprietary  concerns  and  liability  issues.
The  Department  has  involved  some  of  its  Defense  Industrial  Base  (DIB)  contractors in a pilot program to “improve sharing of information on  cyber  threat,  alerts,  and  sensitive  data  by  establishing  a  new  partnership  model.”150  This  pilot  program  is  governed  by  voluntary  agreements  between  DoD  and  cleared  defense  contractors.
These  contractors  threat  information and best practices:   classified  and  unclassified   receive   cyber   In  return,  the  private  sector  partners  agree  to  share  cyber intrusion information with the DoD Cyber Crime  Center,  which  is  to  serve  as  the  focal  point  for  information-sharing  and  digital  forensics  analysis  activities related to protecting unclassified information  on DIB information systems and networks.
In  addition,  the  officials  stated  that  they  expect  to  eventually  modify  DoD  contractual  to  encourage contractors to increase cybersecurity in their  networks.151   language             149 William J. Lynn III, Defending a New Domain: The Pentagon's Cyberstrategy,  FOREIGN AFF., Sept./Oct.
150 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, GAO-10-628, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE  PROTECTION: KEY PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CYBER EXPECTATIONS NEED TO BE CONSISTENTLY  ADDRESSED 22 (2010), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d10628.pdf.
CONCLUSION   The   federal   requires   adequate   government     operational  relationships  that  will  facilitate  information  and  resource  sharing  in  times  of  expanding  cybersecurity  threats  and  shrinking  federal  budgets.
All  federal  departments  and  agencies  must  participate  and  contribute  to  more  secure  information  systems,  but  the  departments  with  the  largest  budgets  and  most  expertise—the  Departments  of  Defense  and  Homeland  Security,  and  those  with  greater  insight  into  the capabilities and intentions of potential adversaries—likely have the  most significant contributions to make across the federal government  and the private sector.
The  Defense  Industrial  Base  Cyber  Pilot  conducted  by  DoD  and  the  EINSTEIN  program  initiated  by  DHS  are  excellent  examples  of  collaboration  within  government  and  with  the  private  sector.
These  initiatives require expansion and maturation.
The collaborative efforts  between  DoD  and  DHS  in  the  Joint  Coordination  Element  need  to  become  stronger  vehicles  for  information  sharing  and  cooperative  planning.
Following  these  recommendations  will  result  in  better  avoidance  of,  preparation  for,  and  recovery  from  a  devastating  cyber  attack.
The  United  States  government  has  established  good  operational  relationships  to  address  the  cyber  threat,  but  it  must  improve these relationships to be more inclusive and to coordinate at  a much faster pace.
Who Should  Lead U.S.  Cybersecurity  Efforts?
One author has stated that “the cyber threat  [is] the most pervasive and pernicious threat” facing the country today.1 The danger is no longer  random teenagers looking for thrills by hacking into the local university network, but sophisticated  criminal enterprises looking to steal information or money.
The same technologies used to attack  financial systems can be unleashed on the Nation’s critical infrastructure.
In 2007, several Cabinet  Departments including Defense, Homeland Security, and Commerce were hacked and terabytes of  information were exfiltrated by unknown agents.2  The discovery of the Stuxnet virus in 2010 pointed to nation-state involvement in cyber attacks  at an unprecedented level and followed the Ghostnet penetrations of the Dali Lama’s networks in  2009.
Cybersecurity changed from a nuisance problem in the early 1990s to a vital national security  issue in the early 21st century.
In one of his first acts, President Barack Obama called for a compre- hensive review of U.S. policy on cybersecurity, but little has been done to implement the recommen- dations from the review.3 While the White House published its International Strategy for Cyberspace  in May 2011, the document does little to address the current domestic situation.
2   FeatuReS  | 115  newMeyeR  for effective national cybersecurity policy, the  lack of consensus on which leadership model  would best achieve the desired results continues  to delay policy implementation.
Several authors have proposed strategies and  models for U.S. cybersecurity policy leadership.
One prominent school of thought, highlighted  by the Center for Strategic and International  Studies (CSIS) report Securing Cyberspace for the  44th Presidency, is that cybersecurity policy direction  should fall under a powerful “czar” in the Executive  Office of the President.
A second school of thought   despite the need for effective national  cybersecurity policy, the lack of  consensus on which leadership   model would best achieve the   desired results continues to delay   policy implementation  argues that policy direction would best be accom- plished through a Cabinet-level department.
One  study from this school argues that responsibility  should remain with the Department of Homeland  Security due to its role as the lead agency for  response to domestic incidents.4 Others argue  that moving the responsibility to the Executive  Office of the President from Homeland Security  would be insufficient and that a broader restructur- ing is needed to address the triad of cybersecurity  (government at Federal, state, and local levels).
Paul Rosenzweig presents an argument for the  Department of Defense (DOD) assuming the lead- ership role based on the depth of talent and expe- rience resident in the National Security Agency  (NSA) as compared to the relative lack of human  capital in the Department of Homeland Security.5  None of the present studies has provided a  model that achieves the necessary political con- sensus on the approach to cybersecurity lead- ership to implement.
The Department of  Homeland Security, although having respon- sibility, has not been able to achieve necessary  levels of performance for a variety of reasons.
Indeed, the White House czar model offers the  advantage of access to the inner circle of the  President and the bully pulpit but no regula- tory capability.
Options for Cybersecurity Leadership Policy leadership can remain in the White  House with a powerful cyber czar able to set and  implement policy decisions with the backing  of the President.
The Department  of Homeland Security currently has a role in  policy coordination among government agen- cies for nondefense networks and systems, but  each department remains responsible for its  own systems.6 DOD is responsible for its own  systems, both classified and unclassified, as well  as some defense-related critical infrastructure  necessary to defend the Nation.
The History  The origins of U.S. cybersecurity policy rest  in critical infrastructure protection efforts begun  during the Clinton administration.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 13010,  “Critical Infrastructure Protection,” in 1996,  which created the President’s Commission on  Critical Infrastructure Protection and high- lighted the threat to the Nation’s economic  and national security from cyber attacks.
PDD 63 established several cybersecu- rity-related organizations within the govern- ment including the National Coordinator  for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and  Counterterrorism with an Office of Critical  Infrastructure to support the Coordinator and  the National Infrastructure Protection Center.
It also was the first step in encouraging the for- mation of the sectoral Information Sharing and  Analysis Centers (ISACs), which have con- tinued to develop and form a key part of the  public-private partnership necessary to secure  cyberspace.
With these centers, the Clinton  administration focused on the public-private  partnership as the means to secure cyberspace.
While the George W. Bush administration  initially continued the Clinton approach, the  attacks of 9/11 caused it to significantly refocus  from cyber attacks on critical infrastructure to  physical attacks by terrorist groups.
The National  Strategy to Secure Cyberspace was published in  2003 but was criticized as more a list of rec- ommendations than a comprehensive strategy  document that tied in ends, ways, and means.7  In addition, the Bush administration published  the National Infrastructure Protection Plan in  2006, which designated 17 (now 18) key infra- structure sectors that required individual protec- tion plans.
The Bush administration also pub- lished the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity  Initiative in 2008, but critics found that its focus  on the government Internet domain (.gov) was   too limited.
During the Bush administration,  cybersecurity responsibility was vague, with lim- ited leadership and diluted responsibility in the  White House, Homeland Security, and DOD.
Homeland Security was given the overall coor- dination role, but responsibility still rested with  individual agencies.
The Obama administration initiated  its cybersecurity efforts with the “60-Day  Cyberspace Policy Review.” Published in late  May 2009, the document was an ambitious  effort that presented a solid review of where  the government was in relation to cybersecu- rity, but it offered little in the way of vision on  how to get to the destination.
The key recom- mendation of the review is that the President  should appoint a single cybersecurity policy  official to serve as the central coordinator for  government and national efforts.
This essen- tially repeats the recommendation made by the  Center for Strategic and International Studies  commission report in 2008.
Interestingly,  the White House did not name a cyber czar  until December 2009, when Howard Schmidt  accepted the position.
In May 2011, the White  House issued the International Strategy to Secure  Cyberspace, which provided an outline of U.S.  intentions at the international level, but the  document is largely silent on what needs to be  done within the government and the Nation  to address the challenges domestically.
Although  several bills were presented in the 110th Congress  and even more in the 111th Congress, no compre- hensive cybersecurity legalization has been voted  into law, and more than 30 separate pieces of leg- islation are pending before the 112th Congress.8  The Congressional Research Service pointed out  that no single congressional committee or execu- tive agency has primary responsibility for cyber- security issues, and this has led to a hodgepodge   PRISM 3, no.
2   FeatuReS  | 117  President obama waits to be  introduced at critical infrastructure  Ceos meeting on cybersecurity at  eisenhower executive office Building  newMeyeR  ) a z u o S   e t e P (   e s u o H   e t i  h W    e h T  of initiatives and good ideas but no unifying focus.9 Many similarities exist among the documents that  form the progression of U.S. cybersecurity policy under three administrations, and the outlines of  the policy are sound—but difficult interagency and legislative decisions necessary for effective action  remain to be taken.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) commented that cybersecurity  leadership was challenged by a lack of top-level leadership and the difficulty of coordinating across  multiple agencies.
Policy Options  There are several basic options for providing cybersecurity leadership within the U.S.  Government: a powerful White House–based executive/coordinator; designation of a Cabinet- level agency with the requisite authority to be directive as opposed to consultative in dealing with  other departments; and creation of some hybrid entity.
If Cabinet-level leadership is chosen, the  follow-up question is which department will take the lead, with Homeland Security and DOD as  the most likely candidates.
A leading option for  cybersecurity leadership is to establish a National Coordinator for Cybersecurity within the White  House structure.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
appointing an assistant for cyberspace  and establishing a cybersecurity direc- torate within the National Security  Council to assume current Homeland  Security Council responsibilities  ??
establishing a National Office for  Cyberspace  that  would  assume  the responsibilities for the current  National Cybersecurity Center and  Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force.
The office/official would also assume over- sight and control over the multiple cybersecu- rity functions within the Federal Government  and provide a single point of authority on  related policy decisions.
The CSIS report placed the blame for the  current weakness in cybersecurity policy at the  Federal level on “lack of strategic focus, overlap- ping missions, poor coordination and collabora- tion, and diffuse responsibility.”10 This lack of  focus continued even though the Clinton admin- istration adopted PDD 63 and established Richard  Clarke as the National Coordinator for Security,  Infrastructure Protection, and Counterterrorism.
Sharp concurred with the CSIS recom- mendation and pointed out the current lack of  an authoritative decisionmaker in a position to  compel action to respond to a serious threat to  national security.11 He offered two models—one  based on U.S. Strategic Command and its abil- ity to order military components within the  Global Information Grid to take action, and the  other based on the role played by the Director  of National Intelligence (DNI).
The DNI can- not direct subordinate agencies to take action,  but it has the power to reallocate resources,  make budgetary changes, and issue formal task- ings that would enable a National Coordinator  for Cybersecurity to be effective.
Senator Joseph Lieberman stated that there  needs to be a strong cybersecurity coordina- tor within the White House to oversee both  the civilian and military efforts in cybersecu- rity when he introduced legislation in 2009 to  implement the CSIS recommendations.12  The White House cyber czar option has not  met with universal approval.
There are several  weaknesses in the PDD 63 version, including the  lack of budget authority and difficulties in getting  the different departments to agree.
Resources  are the key in Washington, and without bud- get authority, the National Cyber Coordinator  will have a difficult job.
Fundamental to the  importance of the cyber czar is the authority del- egated to him by the President.
To be effective, a  leader requires authority commensurate with his  responsibility.
Empowerment of the cyber czar by  the President is fundamental.
They believe that merely placing responsi- bility in the White House would be insufficient  to effect change and that much more drastic  reorganization would be required.
Another weakness of the White House  cyber czar is the lack of accountability to  Congress.
The legislation proposed by Senator  Lieberman required the President to nominate  a cyber coordinator for Senate approval simi- lar to the process used for the DNI.
This would  instill some measure of congressional oversight  and allow Congress to demand testimony from  the cyber czar.
Senator Susan Collins  resisted placing cybersecurity leadership in the  White House because of the difficulty for con- gressional oversight of budgets and spending.13 Filling the job of a cybersecurity coordina- tor proved difficult.
It took more than 7 months  from the completion of the Obama administra- tion’s cybersecurity review to name the coor- dinator.
Two primary options exist for plac- ing a Cabinet department in charge of cyberse- curity: Defense and Homeland Security.
Cabinet-level management of the problem is  more in line with the traditional response to  threats for the U.S. Government.
Placing  one department in a position to mandate to  another how it is to defend and operate its  internal computer systems could be prob- lematic.
The Trusted Internet Connection  (TIC) program that was designed to reduce  the number of governmental connections to  the Internet is indicative of some of the prob- lems.
TIC was launched in 2007 by the Office  of Management and Budget to improve the  reliability and security of U.S. Government  networks, with all departments except DOD  required to participate.
As of September  2009, none of the 23 agencies involved was  fully compliant.15  Option B (1): Placing the Department  of  Homeland  Security  in  Charge.
The  Department of Homeland Security legal author- ities allow it to protect information shared with  the private sector, lead a civilian response to  a cyber attack, request law enforcement and  intelligence assistance from other government  agencies, and offer liability protection to com- panies that sell and use technology to defend  against cyber terrorism.
Given that more than  85 percent of the government’s information  traffic flows over private sector networks, it is  necessary that the lead agency for cybersecu- rity has strong relations with the private sec- tor.
Homeland Security has already established  relationships with the private sector via the  ISACs and has included private sector repre- sentatives on the watch floor at the National  Cybersecurity and Communications Integration  Center (NCCIC).
Homeland Security also has  existing regulatory capacity.
Additionally, Homeland Security has expe- rience with cybersecurity.
Since the creation of  the department, it has had significant responsi- bilities for critical infrastructure protection and  cybersecurity.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team,  NCCIC, and has implemented lessons learned  and modified its internal structure to address its  shortcomings.
With its appointment to a focal  point role, it has advanced cybersecurity readi- ness within government, but it is far from perfect.
Among the challenges facing Homeland  Security is attracting and retaining suffi- cient personnel to meet its current, let alone  expanded cybersecurity responsibilities.
In  2011, the department announced that it plans  to increase its cybersecurity staff by 50 percent  to 400 by October 2012.
Citing the concept that cyber- security has now become an essential national  security issue, the report argues that a departmen- tal-level agency could not perform the overarch- ing policy coordination needed and thus rejects  an enhanced Department of Homeland Security  oversight role.
With the threat including foreign  intelligence agencies and militaries, the report  argues that cybersecurity is well beyond the scope  of Homeland Security and critical infrastruc- ture protection.
Cybersecurity has become an  international problem that significantly exceeds  the capabilities and management capacity of  Homeland Security.
Defense already  has responsibility for defending its own systems  and has been forward leaning in establishing  policy and making organizational changes for  cybersecurity.
Among the initiatives was the  establishment of U.S. Cyber Command to   have overall responsibility within the military  for cyber defense and attack issues.
The depart- ment has also established relationships with the  private sector through its defense industrial base  cybersecurity pilot initiatives, which fall under  its responsibility for defense-related critical  infrastructure protection.
Much of the argument for giving cybersecu- rity leadership responsibility to DOD is based on  its combination of experience and manpower.16  NSA has extensive experience and capability  for monitoring and protecting networks.
In  October 2010, Homeland Security and DOD  signed a memorandum of understanding that  allowed NSA to support Homeland Security  cybersecurity efforts and established a person- nel exchange between the agencies.17  The drawbacks of placing DOD in charge  of cybersecurity are numerous.
Defense also would suffer many of the same  challenges in interagency coordination that  affect Homeland Security.
Additionally, DOD  relationships with the private sector are not  nearly as extensive as Homeland Security’s.
Challenges would also be likely from civil liber- ties groups and Congress to a greater militariza- tion of cyberspace.
Option B (3): Create a New Cabinet- level Agency for Cybersecurity.
Creating a new  agency that combines all cybersecurity func- tions offers a chance to address the deficiencies  of the current models.
Precedents exist with the  National Security Act of 1947, which created  DOD in response to the new threats emerging  from the Cold War and the aftermath of World   PRISM 3, no.
2   FeatuReS  | 121  newMeyeR  War II, and with the creation of the Department  of Homeland Security in 2002 in response to the  attacks of 9/11.
Several experts and politicians  have claimed that the threat of cyber attack and  other cyber risks have exceeded the capabilities  of current arrangements and that cybersecurity   a Cabinet-level agency allows for  congressional oversight of budgets  and leadership consistent with normal  constitutional process  is now an issue of national security.
Creation of  a new agency allows for the combining of cyber  offensive and defensive operations.
Consolidation within one department  clarifies the lines of authority and centralizing  control over budgets and policy.
As the experience with Homeland Security  demonstrated, it is not easy to combine agen- cies from different departments with different  organizational cultures into an effective orga- nization.
The delays in properly organizing for  cybersecurity and taking effective action are  already a national security issue.
Turf wars are  already an issue with cybersecurity policy.
O p t i o n   C :   C r e a t e   a   D i r e c t o r   o f  Cybersecurity.
A variation of the White   House cyber czar would be the creation of a  powerful coordinator for cybersecurity along  the lines of the DNI.
Created in the after- math of the 9/11 attacks to unify the efforts  of domestic, international, and military intel- ligence programs, the DNI serves as the head  of the Intelligence Community.
Of critical importance,  the DNI develops and executes the budget  for the National Intelligence Program based  on inputs and priorities from the Service and  agency components.
A similar position could be created for  cyber security, a Director of Cybersecurity  (DCYBER).
Implementing legislation could  allow for budget oversight across the Federal  Government, Senate confirmation of the direc- tor, and establishment of clear lines of authority  and responsibility with the government as well  as for relationships with the private sector.
Cybersecurity must compete on  the legislative and executive agenda with other  significant issues.
It is clear, however, that current structures are  insufficient to achieve cybersecurity.
The centralization of cybersecurity pol- icy initiatives in the Executive Office of the  President remains a leading contender; it  offers the power of the Presidency to achieve   122 |  FeatuReS   PRISM 3, no.
S U  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
uSaF Brigadier General  Gregory Brundidge discusses  need to aid collaboration  and improve empowerment  of cyber defense personnel,  technology, and processes   cross-organizational agreement within the executive branch.
Strong leadership is clearly essential  for achieving sufficient cybersecurity.
The most significant limitations on a White House cyber czar center on his authority to com- pel compliance from the disparate executive branch agencies.
Placing the military in charge of  cybersecurity for civilian systems would not be politically viable.
Creation of a new department to focus on cybersecurity would achieve many of the objectives  listed in the CSIS report.
2   FeatuReS  | 123  newMeyeR  DOD, Homeland Security, Commerce, and  State.
Starting something in Washington  at the Cabinet level normally requires a dra- matic trigger event along the lines of 9/11 or an  indefatigable champion willing to expend the  political capital necessary to carry the battle.
To  date, this has not occurred on the cyber front.
Other issues have occupied the political space  and pushed cybersecurity to the rear.
Retaining cybersecurity leadership within  the Department of Homeland Security is the  most likely alternative among the Cabinet- level organizations.
As previously discussed, the  department has the basic regulatory functions  necessary and significant experience in cyber- security issues.
The relationship with DOD has  improved significantly in cybersecurity and a  cooperative strategy is in place.
What Homeland Security lacks in the cyber- security leadership role is consistent Presidential  and congressional focus.
It has a coordination  role given to it by the President in a series of  decision documents, but coordination is not  control.
Homeland Security cannot truly compel  other departments to adhere to its policies and  decisions.
The department itself is still growing  and developing.
Congress   has not helped the problems at the department  and must clarify its committee jurisdiction issues  regarding not only cybersecurity but also all of  the missions assigned to Homeland Security.
At  present, more than 80 committees have a role in  the department’s oversight.18  The other significant hurdle for Homeland  Security is building the human capital neces- sary to establish and implement policy and  operations in support of cybersecurity.
The  department has announced ambitious plans for  growing its cyber forces, but it will not be easy.
Recommendations  Cybersecurity is a daunting policy prob- lem, and a simple solution is not apparent.
Establish a Director of National  Cybersecurity.
With proper legislative action, the  DCYBER would have clear budget  and operational authority over cyber- security programs across the Federal  Government.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
measure of independence from polit- ical concerns and are used in other  Federal agencies such as the Federal  Bureau of Investigation and Equal  Opportunity Commission.
Enact legislation to provide Homeland  Security clear directive authority for  cybersecurity across nondefense agen- cies.
Simple coordination has not been  effective in improving cybersecurity  across Federal agencies.
A definitive  authority is required for Homeland  Security to mandate action and adjust  the priorities of other agencies for this  critical national security issue.
To attract  and retain qualified personnel, the  standard General Schedule has proven  insufficient.
Formalize personnel exchanges between  Homeland Security and DOD for cyber- security personnel.
Congress needs to out- line the limitations on intelligence  exchange between military and law  enforcement for cyber related issues.
With the vast majority of  computer networks and other criti- cal infrastructure under private sec- tor control, it is imperative that they  have a continuous voice in the poli- cymaking process.
Confidentiality and  liability issues are manageable.
Conclusion  Cybersecurity concerns have only grown  with the expansion of digital technology into  all aspects of daily life and daily government  operations.
President Obama in the International  Strategy to Secure Cyberspace stated that cyber- security is part and parcel of everyday life for all  Americans and much of the world.
The Department of Homeland  Security would continue to play an impor- tant role in protecting civilian governmental  systems and coordinating with the private  sector.
DOD has already taken several steps  to improve its capabilities for action, and  senior leaders are addressing cybersecurity in  a responsible manner.
Decisive action is  required now.
2   FeatuReS  | 125  newMeyeR  Notes  1 Walter Gary Sharp, Sr., “The Past, Present and Future of Cybersecurity,” Journal of National Security Law &  Policy 4, no.
During the presentation of the Department of Defense Cyber Security  Strategy in July 2011, Deputy Secretary of Defense William J. Lynn III commented that another major loss of  sensitive data occurred in early 2011.
3 See the Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and Communications Infrastructure  (Washington, DC: The White House, 2009), available at <www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/Cyberspace_Policy_ Review_final.pdf> and the follow-on critique Cybersecurity Two Years Later, A Report of the Center for Strategic and  International Studies (CSIS) Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency (Washington, DC: CSIS, January  2011), available at <http://csis.org/files/publication/110128_Lewis_CybersecurityTwoYearsLater_Web.pdf>.
4 Gus P. Coldebella and Brian M. White, “Foundation Questions Regarding the Federal Role in   Cybersecurity,” Journal of National Security Law & Policy 4, no.
5 Paul Rosenzweig, “10 Conservative Principles for Cybersecurity Policy,” Backgrounder No.
7 The CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th President was a strong critic.
See also Catherine  A. Theohary and John Rollins, Cybersecurity, Current Legislation, Executive Branch Initiatives, and Options for  Congress (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2009).
8 Amber Corrin, “Will Congressional Infighting Stall Cybersecurity Laws?” Federal Computer Week,  October 11, 2011, available at <http://fcw.com/articles/2011/10/11/congress-cybersecurity-legislation-umuc- panel.aspx>.
10 Cybersecurity Two Years Later, 34.
12 Patrick Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” CQ Researcher 20, no.
14 David A. Powner, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy  Review Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO-11-24 (Washington, DC: Government  Accountability Office, October 2010), available at <www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-24>.
15 Gregory C. Wilshusen, Concerted Effort Needed to Consolidate and Secure Internet Connections at Federal  Agencies, GAO-10-237 (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, March 2010), available at  <www.gao.gov/new.items/d10237.pdf>.
17 “Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of  Defense Regarding Cybersecurity,” September 2010, available at <www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/20101013-dod- dhs-cyber-moa.pdf>.
18 See Timothy Balunis, Jr., and William Hemphill, “Escaping the Entanglement: Reversing Jurisdictional  Fragmentation over the Department of Homeland Security,” Journal of Homeland Security & Emergency  Management 6, no.