Who Should  Lead U.S.  Cybersecurity  Efforts?
One author has stated that “the cyber threat  [is] the most pervasive and pernicious threat” facing the country today.1 The danger is no longer  random teenagers looking for thrills by hacking into the local university network, but sophisticated  criminal enterprises looking to steal information or money.
The same technologies used to attack  financial systems can be unleashed on the Nation’s critical infrastructure.
In 2007, several Cabinet  Departments including Defense, Homeland Security, and Commerce were hacked and terabytes of  information were exfiltrated by unknown agents.2  The discovery of the Stuxnet virus in 2010 pointed to nation-state involvement in cyber attacks  at an unprecedented level and followed the Ghostnet penetrations of the Dali Lama’s networks in  2009.
Cybersecurity changed from a nuisance problem in the early 1990s to a vital national security  issue in the early 21st century.
In one of his first acts, President Barack Obama called for a compre- hensive review of U.S. policy on cybersecurity, but little has been done to implement the recommen- dations from the review.3 While the White House published its International Strategy for Cyberspace  in May 2011, the document does little to address the current domestic situation.
2   FeatuReS  | 115  newMeyeR  for effective national cybersecurity policy, the  lack of consensus on which leadership model  would best achieve the desired results continues  to delay policy implementation.
Several authors have proposed strategies and  models for U.S. cybersecurity policy leadership.
One prominent school of thought, highlighted  by the Center for Strategic and International  Studies (CSIS) report Securing Cyberspace for the  44th Presidency, is that cybersecurity policy direction  should fall under a powerful “czar” in the Executive  Office of the President.
A second school of thought   despite the need for effective national  cybersecurity policy, the lack of  consensus on which leadership   model would best achieve the   desired results continues to delay   policy implementation  argues that policy direction would best be accom- plished through a Cabinet-level department.
One  study from this school argues that responsibility  should remain with the Department of Homeland  Security due to its role as the lead agency for  response to domestic incidents.4 Others argue  that moving the responsibility to the Executive  Office of the President from Homeland Security  would be insufficient and that a broader restructur- ing is needed to address the triad of cybersecurity  (government at Federal, state, and local levels).
Paul Rosenzweig presents an argument for the  Department of Defense (DOD) assuming the lead- ership role based on the depth of talent and expe- rience resident in the National Security Agency  (NSA) as compared to the relative lack of human  capital in the Department of Homeland Security.5  None of the present studies has provided a  model that achieves the necessary political con- sensus on the approach to cybersecurity lead- ership to implement.
The Department of  Homeland Security, although having respon- sibility, has not been able to achieve necessary  levels of performance for a variety of reasons.
Indeed, the White House czar model offers the  advantage of access to the inner circle of the  President and the bully pulpit but no regula- tory capability.
Options for Cybersecurity Leadership Policy leadership can remain in the White  House with a powerful cyber czar able to set and  implement policy decisions with the backing  of the President.
The Department  of Homeland Security currently has a role in  policy coordination among government agen- cies for nondefense networks and systems, but  each department remains responsible for its  own systems.6 DOD is responsible for its own  systems, both classified and unclassified, as well  as some defense-related critical infrastructure  necessary to defend the Nation.
The History  The origins of U.S. cybersecurity policy rest  in critical infrastructure protection efforts begun  during the Clinton administration.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 13010,  “Critical Infrastructure Protection,” in 1996,  which created the President’s Commission on  Critical Infrastructure Protection and high- lighted the threat to the Nation’s economic  and national security from cyber attacks.
PDD 63 established several cybersecu- rity-related organizations within the govern- ment including the National Coordinator  for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and  Counterterrorism with an Office of Critical  Infrastructure to support the Coordinator and  the National Infrastructure Protection Center.
It also was the first step in encouraging the for- mation of the sectoral Information Sharing and  Analysis Centers (ISACs), which have con- tinued to develop and form a key part of the  public-private partnership necessary to secure  cyberspace.
With these centers, the Clinton  administration focused on the public-private  partnership as the means to secure cyberspace.
While the George W. Bush administration  initially continued the Clinton approach, the  attacks of 9/11 caused it to significantly refocus  from cyber attacks on critical infrastructure to  physical attacks by terrorist groups.
The National  Strategy to Secure Cyberspace was published in  2003 but was criticized as more a list of rec- ommendations than a comprehensive strategy  document that tied in ends, ways, and means.7  In addition, the Bush administration published  the National Infrastructure Protection Plan in  2006, which designated 17 (now 18) key infra- structure sectors that required individual protec- tion plans.
The Bush administration also pub- lished the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity  Initiative in 2008, but critics found that its focus  on the government Internet domain (.gov) was   too limited.
During the Bush administration,  cybersecurity responsibility was vague, with lim- ited leadership and diluted responsibility in the  White House, Homeland Security, and DOD.
Homeland Security was given the overall coor- dination role, but responsibility still rested with  individual agencies.
The Obama administration initiated  its cybersecurity efforts with the “60-Day  Cyberspace Policy Review.” Published in late  May 2009, the document was an ambitious  effort that presented a solid review of where  the government was in relation to cybersecu- rity, but it offered little in the way of vision on  how to get to the destination.
The key recom- mendation of the review is that the President  should appoint a single cybersecurity policy  official to serve as the central coordinator for  government and national efforts.
This essen- tially repeats the recommendation made by the  Center for Strategic and International Studies  commission report in 2008.
Interestingly,  the White House did not name a cyber czar  until December 2009, when Howard Schmidt  accepted the position.
In May 2011, the White  House issued the International Strategy to Secure  Cyberspace, which provided an outline of U.S.  intentions at the international level, but the  document is largely silent on what needs to be  done within the government and the Nation  to address the challenges domestically.
Although  several bills were presented in the 110th Congress  and even more in the 111th Congress, no compre- hensive cybersecurity legalization has been voted  into law, and more than 30 separate pieces of leg- islation are pending before the 112th Congress.8  The Congressional Research Service pointed out  that no single congressional committee or execu- tive agency has primary responsibility for cyber- security issues, and this has led to a hodgepodge   PRISM 3, no.
2   FeatuReS  | 117  President obama waits to be  introduced at critical infrastructure  Ceos meeting on cybersecurity at  eisenhower executive office Building  newMeyeR  ) a z u o S   e t e P (   e s u o H   e t i  h W    e h T  of initiatives and good ideas but no unifying focus.9 Many similarities exist among the documents that  form the progression of U.S. cybersecurity policy under three administrations, and the outlines of  the policy are sound—but difficult interagency and legislative decisions necessary for effective action  remain to be taken.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) commented that cybersecurity  leadership was challenged by a lack of top-level leadership and the difficulty of coordinating across  multiple agencies.
Policy Options  There are several basic options for providing cybersecurity leadership within the U.S.  Government: a powerful White House–based executive/coordinator; designation of a Cabinet- level agency with the requisite authority to be directive as opposed to consultative in dealing with  other departments; and creation of some hybrid entity.
If Cabinet-level leadership is chosen, the  follow-up question is which department will take the lead, with Homeland Security and DOD as  the most likely candidates.
A leading option for  cybersecurity leadership is to establish a National Coordinator for Cybersecurity within the White  House structure.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
appointing an assistant for cyberspace  and establishing a cybersecurity direc- torate within the National Security  Council to assume current Homeland  Security Council responsibilities  ??
establishing a National Office for  Cyberspace  that  would  assume  the responsibilities for the current  National Cybersecurity Center and  Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force.
The office/official would also assume over- sight and control over the multiple cybersecu- rity functions within the Federal Government  and provide a single point of authority on  related policy decisions.
The CSIS report placed the blame for the  current weakness in cybersecurity policy at the  Federal level on “lack of strategic focus, overlap- ping missions, poor coordination and collabora- tion, and diffuse responsibility.”10 This lack of  focus continued even though the Clinton admin- istration adopted PDD 63 and established Richard  Clarke as the National Coordinator for Security,  Infrastructure Protection, and Counterterrorism.
Sharp concurred with the CSIS recom- mendation and pointed out the current lack of  an authoritative decisionmaker in a position to  compel action to respond to a serious threat to  national security.11 He offered two models—one  based on U.S. Strategic Command and its abil- ity to order military components within the  Global Information Grid to take action, and the  other based on the role played by the Director  of National Intelligence (DNI).
The DNI can- not direct subordinate agencies to take action,  but it has the power to reallocate resources,  make budgetary changes, and issue formal task- ings that would enable a National Coordinator  for Cybersecurity to be effective.
Senator Joseph Lieberman stated that there  needs to be a strong cybersecurity coordina- tor within the White House to oversee both  the civilian and military efforts in cybersecu- rity when he introduced legislation in 2009 to  implement the CSIS recommendations.12  The White House cyber czar option has not  met with universal approval.
There are several  weaknesses in the PDD 63 version, including the  lack of budget authority and difficulties in getting  the different departments to agree.
Resources  are the key in Washington, and without bud- get authority, the National Cyber Coordinator  will have a difficult job.
Fundamental to the  importance of the cyber czar is the authority del- egated to him by the President.
To be effective, a  leader requires authority commensurate with his  responsibility.
Empowerment of the cyber czar by  the President is fundamental.
They believe that merely placing responsi- bility in the White House would be insufficient  to effect change and that much more drastic  reorganization would be required.
Another weakness of the White House  cyber czar is the lack of accountability to  Congress.
The legislation proposed by Senator  Lieberman required the President to nominate  a cyber coordinator for Senate approval simi- lar to the process used for the DNI.
This would  instill some measure of congressional oversight  and allow Congress to demand testimony from  the cyber czar.
Senator Susan Collins  resisted placing cybersecurity leadership in the  White House because of the difficulty for con- gressional oversight of budgets and spending.13 Filling the job of a cybersecurity coordina- tor proved difficult.
It took more than 7 months  from the completion of the Obama administra- tion’s cybersecurity review to name the coor- dinator.
Two primary options exist for plac- ing a Cabinet department in charge of cyberse- curity: Defense and Homeland Security.
Cabinet-level management of the problem is  more in line with the traditional response to  threats for the U.S. Government.
Placing  one department in a position to mandate to  another how it is to defend and operate its  internal computer systems could be prob- lematic.
The Trusted Internet Connection  (TIC) program that was designed to reduce  the number of governmental connections to  the Internet is indicative of some of the prob- lems.
TIC was launched in 2007 by the Office  of Management and Budget to improve the  reliability and security of U.S. Government  networks, with all departments except DOD  required to participate.
As of September  2009, none of the 23 agencies involved was  fully compliant.15  Option B (1): Placing the Department  of  Homeland  Security  in  Charge.
The  Department of Homeland Security legal author- ities allow it to protect information shared with  the private sector, lead a civilian response to  a cyber attack, request law enforcement and  intelligence assistance from other government  agencies, and offer liability protection to com- panies that sell and use technology to defend  against cyber terrorism.
Given that more than  85 percent of the government’s information  traffic flows over private sector networks, it is  necessary that the lead agency for cybersecu- rity has strong relations with the private sec- tor.
Homeland Security has already established  relationships with the private sector via the  ISACs and has included private sector repre- sentatives on the watch floor at the National  Cybersecurity and Communications Integration  Center (NCCIC).
Homeland Security also has  existing regulatory capacity.
Additionally, Homeland Security has expe- rience with cybersecurity.
Since the creation of  the department, it has had significant responsi- bilities for critical infrastructure protection and  cybersecurity.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team,  NCCIC, and has implemented lessons learned  and modified its internal structure to address its  shortcomings.
With its appointment to a focal  point role, it has advanced cybersecurity readi- ness within government, but it is far from perfect.
Among the challenges facing Homeland  Security is attracting and retaining suffi- cient personnel to meet its current, let alone  expanded cybersecurity responsibilities.
In  2011, the department announced that it plans  to increase its cybersecurity staff by 50 percent  to 400 by October 2012.
Citing the concept that cyber- security has now become an essential national  security issue, the report argues that a departmen- tal-level agency could not perform the overarch- ing policy coordination needed and thus rejects  an enhanced Department of Homeland Security  oversight role.
With the threat including foreign  intelligence agencies and militaries, the report  argues that cybersecurity is well beyond the scope  of Homeland Security and critical infrastruc- ture protection.
Cybersecurity has become an  international problem that significantly exceeds  the capabilities and management capacity of  Homeland Security.
Defense already  has responsibility for defending its own systems  and has been forward leaning in establishing  policy and making organizational changes for  cybersecurity.
Among the initiatives was the  establishment of U.S. Cyber Command to   have overall responsibility within the military  for cyber defense and attack issues.
The depart- ment has also established relationships with the  private sector through its defense industrial base  cybersecurity pilot initiatives, which fall under  its responsibility for defense-related critical  infrastructure protection.
Much of the argument for giving cybersecu- rity leadership responsibility to DOD is based on  its combination of experience and manpower.16  NSA has extensive experience and capability  for monitoring and protecting networks.
In  October 2010, Homeland Security and DOD  signed a memorandum of understanding that  allowed NSA to support Homeland Security  cybersecurity efforts and established a person- nel exchange between the agencies.17  The drawbacks of placing DOD in charge  of cybersecurity are numerous.
Defense also would suffer many of the same  challenges in interagency coordination that  affect Homeland Security.
Additionally, DOD  relationships with the private sector are not  nearly as extensive as Homeland Security’s.
Challenges would also be likely from civil liber- ties groups and Congress to a greater militariza- tion of cyberspace.
Option B (3): Create a New Cabinet- level Agency for Cybersecurity.
Creating a new  agency that combines all cybersecurity func- tions offers a chance to address the deficiencies  of the current models.
Precedents exist with the  National Security Act of 1947, which created  DOD in response to the new threats emerging  from the Cold War and the aftermath of World   PRISM 3, no.
2   FeatuReS  | 121  newMeyeR  War II, and with the creation of the Department  of Homeland Security in 2002 in response to the  attacks of 9/11.
Several experts and politicians  have claimed that the threat of cyber attack and  other cyber risks have exceeded the capabilities  of current arrangements and that cybersecurity   a Cabinet-level agency allows for  congressional oversight of budgets  and leadership consistent with normal  constitutional process  is now an issue of national security.
Creation of  a new agency allows for the combining of cyber  offensive and defensive operations.
Consolidation within one department  clarifies the lines of authority and centralizing  control over budgets and policy.
As the experience with Homeland Security  demonstrated, it is not easy to combine agen- cies from different departments with different  organizational cultures into an effective orga- nization.
The delays in properly organizing for  cybersecurity and taking effective action are  already a national security issue.
Turf wars are  already an issue with cybersecurity policy.
O p t i o n   C :   C r e a t e   a   D i r e c t o r   o f  Cybersecurity.
A variation of the White   House cyber czar would be the creation of a  powerful coordinator for cybersecurity along  the lines of the DNI.
Created in the after- math of the 9/11 attacks to unify the efforts  of domestic, international, and military intel- ligence programs, the DNI serves as the head  of the Intelligence Community.
Of critical importance,  the DNI develops and executes the budget  for the National Intelligence Program based  on inputs and priorities from the Service and  agency components.
A similar position could be created for  cyber security, a Director of Cybersecurity  (DCYBER).
Implementing legislation could  allow for budget oversight across the Federal  Government, Senate confirmation of the direc- tor, and establishment of clear lines of authority  and responsibility with the government as well  as for relationships with the private sector.
Cybersecurity must compete on  the legislative and executive agenda with other  significant issues.
It is clear, however, that current structures are  insufficient to achieve cybersecurity.
The centralization of cybersecurity pol- icy initiatives in the Executive Office of the  President remains a leading contender; it  offers the power of the Presidency to achieve   122 |  FeatuReS   PRISM 3, no.
S U  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
uSaF Brigadier General  Gregory Brundidge discusses  need to aid collaboration  and improve empowerment  of cyber defense personnel,  technology, and processes   cross-organizational agreement within the executive branch.
Strong leadership is clearly essential  for achieving sufficient cybersecurity.
The most significant limitations on a White House cyber czar center on his authority to com- pel compliance from the disparate executive branch agencies.
Placing the military in charge of  cybersecurity for civilian systems would not be politically viable.
Creation of a new department to focus on cybersecurity would achieve many of the objectives  listed in the CSIS report.
2   FeatuReS  | 123  newMeyeR  DOD, Homeland Security, Commerce, and  State.
Starting something in Washington  at the Cabinet level normally requires a dra- matic trigger event along the lines of 9/11 or an  indefatigable champion willing to expend the  political capital necessary to carry the battle.
To  date, this has not occurred on the cyber front.
Other issues have occupied the political space  and pushed cybersecurity to the rear.
Retaining cybersecurity leadership within  the Department of Homeland Security is the  most likely alternative among the Cabinet- level organizations.
As previously discussed, the  department has the basic regulatory functions  necessary and significant experience in cyber- security issues.
The relationship with DOD has  improved significantly in cybersecurity and a  cooperative strategy is in place.
What Homeland Security lacks in the cyber- security leadership role is consistent Presidential  and congressional focus.
It has a coordination  role given to it by the President in a series of  decision documents, but coordination is not  control.
Homeland Security cannot truly compel  other departments to adhere to its policies and  decisions.
The department itself is still growing  and developing.
Congress   has not helped the problems at the department  and must clarify its committee jurisdiction issues  regarding not only cybersecurity but also all of  the missions assigned to Homeland Security.
At  present, more than 80 committees have a role in  the department’s oversight.18  The other significant hurdle for Homeland  Security is building the human capital neces- sary to establish and implement policy and  operations in support of cybersecurity.
The  department has announced ambitious plans for  growing its cyber forces, but it will not be easy.
Recommendations  Cybersecurity is a daunting policy prob- lem, and a simple solution is not apparent.
Establish a Director of National  Cybersecurity.
With proper legislative action, the  DCYBER would have clear budget  and operational authority over cyber- security programs across the Federal  Government.
2  who Should lead u.S. cybeRSecuRIty effoRtS?
measure of independence from polit- ical concerns and are used in other  Federal agencies such as the Federal  Bureau of Investigation and Equal  Opportunity Commission.
Enact legislation to provide Homeland  Security clear directive authority for  cybersecurity across nondefense agen- cies.
Simple coordination has not been  effective in improving cybersecurity  across Federal agencies.
A definitive  authority is required for Homeland  Security to mandate action and adjust  the priorities of other agencies for this  critical national security issue.
To attract  and retain qualified personnel, the  standard General Schedule has proven  insufficient.
Formalize personnel exchanges between  Homeland Security and DOD for cyber- security personnel.
Congress needs to out- line the limitations on intelligence  exchange between military and law  enforcement for cyber related issues.
With the vast majority of  computer networks and other criti- cal infrastructure under private sec- tor control, it is imperative that they  have a continuous voice in the poli- cymaking process.
Confidentiality and  liability issues are manageable.
Conclusion  Cybersecurity concerns have only grown  with the expansion of digital technology into  all aspects of daily life and daily government  operations.
President Obama in the International  Strategy to Secure Cyberspace stated that cyber- security is part and parcel of everyday life for all  Americans and much of the world.
The Department of Homeland  Security would continue to play an impor- tant role in protecting civilian governmental  systems and coordinating with the private  sector.
DOD has already taken several steps  to improve its capabilities for action, and  senior leaders are addressing cybersecurity in  a responsible manner.
Decisive action is  required now.
2   FeatuReS  | 125  newMeyeR  Notes  1 Walter Gary Sharp, Sr., “The Past, Present and Future of Cybersecurity,” Journal of National Security Law &  Policy 4, no.
During the presentation of the Department of Defense Cyber Security  Strategy in July 2011, Deputy Secretary of Defense William J. Lynn III commented that another major loss of  sensitive data occurred in early 2011.
3 See the Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and Communications Infrastructure  (Washington, DC: The White House, 2009), available at <www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/Cyberspace_Policy_ Review_final.pdf> and the follow-on critique Cybersecurity Two Years Later, A Report of the Center for Strategic and  International Studies (CSIS) Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency (Washington, DC: CSIS, January  2011), available at <http://csis.org/files/publication/110128_Lewis_CybersecurityTwoYearsLater_Web.pdf>.
4 Gus P. Coldebella and Brian M. White, “Foundation Questions Regarding the Federal Role in   Cybersecurity,” Journal of National Security Law & Policy 4, no.
5 Paul Rosenzweig, “10 Conservative Principles for Cybersecurity Policy,” Backgrounder No.
7 The CSIS Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th President was a strong critic.
See also Catherine  A. Theohary and John Rollins, Cybersecurity, Current Legislation, Executive Branch Initiatives, and Options for  Congress (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2009).
8 Amber Corrin, “Will Congressional Infighting Stall Cybersecurity Laws?” Federal Computer Week,  October 11, 2011, available at <http://fcw.com/articles/2011/10/11/congress-cybersecurity-legislation-umuc- panel.aspx>.
10 Cybersecurity Two Years Later, 34.
12 Patrick Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” CQ Researcher 20, no.
14 David A. Powner, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy  Review Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO-11-24 (Washington, DC: Government  Accountability Office, October 2010), available at <www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-24>.
15 Gregory C. Wilshusen, Concerted Effort Needed to Consolidate and Secure Internet Connections at Federal  Agencies, GAO-10-237 (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, March 2010), available at  <www.gao.gov/new.items/d10237.pdf>.
17 “Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of  Defense Regarding Cybersecurity,” September 2010, available at <www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/20101013-dod- dhs-cyber-moa.pdf>.
18 See Timothy Balunis, Jr., and William Hemphill, “Escaping the Entanglement: Reversing Jurisdictional  Fragmentation over the Department of Homeland Security,” Journal of Homeland Security & Emergency  Management 6, no.
2  Draft NIST Roadmap for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.1   December 5, 2017     1.
Introduction   This companion Roadmap to the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure  Cybersecurity (Cybersecurity Framework or the Framework) describes plans for  advancing the Framework development process, discusses the National Institute of  Standards and Technology’s (NIST’s) next steps with the Framework, and identifies key  areas of development, alignment, and collaboration.
This plan provides a description of  anticipated future activities related to the Framework and offers stakeholders another  opportunity to participate actively in the continuing Framework development process.
While the plan is focused on the Cybersecurity Framework, the results of work described  in this roadmap are expected to be useful to a much broader audience to improve  cybersecurity risk management in much the same way that the Framework itself is useful  to many sectors and organizations that are not strictly defined as part of the critical  infrastructure.
Evolution of the Cybersecurity Framework   In accordance with Executive Order 13636,2 NIST utilized a year-long consultative process  with stakeholders to create the Cybersecurity Framework.
Released February 12, 2014, the  Framework is an approach to cybersecurity risk management that aligns policy  requirements, business needs, and technological methodologies.
Since the release of the Cybersecurity Framework, in its role defined in the Cybersecurity  Enhancement Act of 2014,3 NIST continues to be a convener of a public-private partnership  and “facilitate and support the development of a voluntary, consensus-based, industry-led  set of standards, guidelines, best practices, methodologies, procedures, and processes to  cost-effectively reduce cyber risks.” Accordingly, NIST:   ?
Issued a Request for Information (RFI),4 December 11, 2015, regarding   Cybersecurity Framework use;   ?
Published a proposed Draft Version 1.17 of the Cybersecurity Framework on   January 10, 2017.
Issued a Request for Comment (RFC),8 through the Federal Register, on the   Cybersecurity Framework draft proposed updates;    ?
Published for public comment a proposed Draft 2 of Version 1.1. of the   Cybersecurity Framework on December 5, 2017.
The Cybersecurity Framework is a living document, and will continue to be updated and  improved with the input and feedback from industry, government, and academia.
Considering the  continuous advancements in technology and the evolving cybersecurity landscape, the  Roadmap will continue to highlight areas of development relevant to the Framework and  also of broader interest.
Topics previously addressed by the Roadmap such as  Authentication and Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) have been researched,  developed, and incorporated into the current draft of the Cybersecurity Framework  Version 1.1.
New topics included in this version of the Roadmap include:   ?
Measuring Cybersecurity;  ?
Governance and Enterprise Risk Management.
The new Cyber-Attack Lifecycle topic includes the Automated Indicator Sharing and Data  Analytics items from the previous Roadmap, and incorporates the topic of coordinated  vulnerability disclosure.
The title Cyber-Attack Lifecycle reflects the importance of a  holistic, approach that maximizes the value of threat intelligence, discerns threat events  from the large volumes of available data, and reduces timelines to receive vulnerability  information from researchers.
To address a growing need for cybersecurity measurement  that is aligned and supportive of organizational objectives and decisions, Measuring                                                     7 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2017/01/nist-releases-update-cybersecurity-framework   8 [LINK] https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/01/25/2017-01599/proposed-update-to-the-framework- for-improving-critical-infrastructure-cybersecurity   9 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2017/05/16/rfc2-response-initial-analysis-20170515.pdf   10 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/05/cybersecurity-framework-workshop-2017   11 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/2017/07/21/cybersecurity_framework_workshop_summary.pdf    2   DRAFT      Cybersecurity is added as a Roadmap item.
Referencing Techniques is added to provide  Framework stakeholders an understanding of future intent for the Informative References  portion of the Core, as well as the general process and methodology of relating one or more  reference documents.
A continued focus on cybersecurity best practices and  implementation relative to small businesses is important to our Nation’s cumulative cyber- posture.
Finally, a continued stakeholder focus on board governance, organizational  governance, and enterprise risk management necessitates a specific topic.
Authentication was renamed  Identity Management to account for a broader range of important technical topics including  authorization and identity proofing.
Technical Privacy Standards has been renamed  Privacy Engineering to better align with the concepts in related NIST publications such as  Interagency Report 8062 - An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in  Federal Systems.
As NIST makes advances and receives feedback from public and private stakeholders on  the Cybersecurity Framework and the Roadmap, these documents will continue to be  revised and updated.
Areas for Development, Alignment, and Collaboration   Several high-priority areas for development, alignment, and collaboration are listed by  section below.
Cybersecurity Workforce  4.4.
Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management  4.5.
Federal Agency Cybersecurity Alignment  4.6.
Governance and Enterprise Risk Management  4.7.
Identity Management  4.8. International Aspects, Impacts, and Alignment  4.9.
Measuring Cybersecurity  4.10.
Small Business Awareness and Resources   While this list of high-priority areas is not intended to be exhaustive, these are important  topics identified by stakeholders that should inform future versions of the Framework.
They require continued focus to evolve areas that have yet to be developed sufficiently or  where further research into their relationship to the Cybersecurity Framework is needed.
To be effective in addressing these areas, NIST will work with stakeholders to identify  primary challenges, solicit input to address those identified needs, and collaboratively  develop and execute action plans for addressing them.
These areas may also reflect  potential capabilities in the Cybersecurity Framework Core.
As progress is made in each of  these areas, they can be used in conjunction with, or as part of, the Framework to enhance  or improve cybersecurity programs.
Whereas conformity assessment can be  used to show that a product, service, or system meets specified cybersecurity risk  management requirements, Confidence Mechanisms build upon conformity assessment to  include means of determining the sufficiency and efficacy of organizational cybersecurity  risk management, inclusive of product, service, and systems conformity.
The output of confidence mechanisms can be used to enhance an organization’s  understanding of its implementation of a Framework profile.
Critical infrastructures’ evolving implementation of Framework  profiles should drive the identification of private sector conformity assessment activities.
NIST continues to encourage the community to build and manage confidence mechanism  programs to assist stakeholders.
Several organizations have begun to develop such  programs.
For example, the British Standards Institute (BSI) is working to build a third- party review of Cybersecurity Framework outcomes as part of an existing Certification to  the International Organization for Standardization and the International Electrotechnical  Commission (ISO/IEC) 27001.
The Information Systems Audit and Control Association  (ISACA) is developing a Cybersecurity Framework-based audit program.
And the NIST  Baldridge Performance Excellence Program encourages self-assessment through its  Cybersecurity Excellence Builder tool.
NIST will continue working with:   •  Those who manage confidence mechanisms programs to assist industry in further   leveraging these resources; and   •  Private and public sector entities that have a need for conformity demonstration, to   help understand how these organizations can leverage existing programs.
Cyber-Attack Lifecycle   Cybersecurity is closely linked to the threats an organization faces from those that would  seek to exploit a vulnerability or weakness.
Therefore, it is important to approach  cybersecurity from the perspective of the cyber-attack lifecycle by identifying threat  sources, threat events, and vulnerabilities that predispose an environment to attack.
The  cyber-attack lifecycle consists of the sequence of events that a malicious agent undertakes  to successfully penetrate a network for nefarious purposes (e.g., data exfiltration,  ransomware attacks, denial of service).
Understanding the Tactics, Techniques and  Procedures (TTP) an attacker may employ and the vulnerabilities an attacker may exploit  are critical to effective cyber defense.
To improve risk management capabilities, it is  important that cyber threat information be readily available to support decision-making.
This includes threat and vulnerability metrics that support determination of likelihood,  impact, and, ultimately, risk.
4   DRAFT   Timely communication and actionable information are critical to counter threat and  address vulnerability.
This includes a near-real time exchange of automated threat and  vulnerability indicators between organizations and information sharing communities such  as Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs), Information Sharing and Analysis  Organizations (ISAOs), industry peers, and supply chain partners and exchanges with  security service providers.
Sharing indicators based on information that is discovered prior  to and during incident response activities enables other organizations to deploy measures  to detect, mitigate, and possibly prevent attacks as they occur.
Additionally, communication  between and among vendors, researchers and industry stakeholders is paramount to  prudent handling of previously unknown vulnerabilities.
Understanding the severity and  indicators of a vulnerability, mitigating the effects of the vulnerability, and addressing the  root cause of the vulnerability are just some of the activities that require coordination  among those stakeholders.
Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure (CVD) develops principles  and best practices in coordinating management of vulnerabilities to benefit all  stakeholders.
Organizations use a combination of standard and proprietary mechanisms to exchange  indicator and vulnerability information.
These mechanisms have differing strengths and  weaknesses and often require organizations to maintain specific process, personnel, and  technical capabilities.
To make these efforts more effective, appropriate guidelines and  standards need to be defined and then adopted in products to enable organizations of  various levels of capability and size to make use of indicators and other related  information.
To support this growing need, NIST SP 800-150 - Guide to Cyber Threat Information  Sharing,12 was published in October 2016 and provides high-level guidance on how to form,  join, and effectively participate in information sharing communities.
Also, standards such  as the International Organization for Standardization ISO/IEC 2914713 and ISO/IEC  3011114 have been developed to outline CVD best practices.
Creation of useful and necessary threat information requires the ability to analyze big data  effectively and efficiently.
This is achieved through data analytics, which is the compilation  and analysis of various types of information with the goal of using this information to drive  decision-making.
Possible  applications of data analytics in this field include integration of threat feeds from varying  sources, automated triage, data filtering, indicator tracking, visualization, and reporting.
Several significant challenges must be overcome for the extraordinary potential of big data  analytics to be realized, including the lack of: taxonomies for big data; mathematical and  measurement foundations; analytic tools; measurement of integrity of tools; and  correlation and causation.
12 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-150.pdf   13 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/45170.html   14 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/53231.html       5   DRAFT   In continued collaboration with DHS and other relevant government participants, NIST  plans to continue its Cyber-Attack Lifecycle research and participate in guidance  development activities such as:   •  Express cyber threat information using machine-readable formats and developing   automated mechanisms for exchanging cyber threat information;   •  Raise awareness of CVD among industry stakeholders;  •  Support private and public sector efforts to further establish and streamline CVD   approaches and methodologies;   •  Support information sharing initiatives by public and private sector organizations  such as Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) and Information Sharing  and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs);   •  Benchmark and measure some of the fundamental scientific elements of big data   (algorithms, machine learning, topology, graph theory, etc.)
through means such as  research, community evaluations, datasets, and challenge problems; and   •  Develop NIST Special Publications on the secure application of big data analytic   techniques in such areas as access control, continuous monitoring, attack warning  and indicators, and security automation.
Cybersecurity Workforce   A skilled cybersecurity workforce is needed to meet the unique cybersecurity needs of  critical infrastructure.
There is a well-documented shortage of cybersecurity  practitioners;15; there is an even more serious shortage of qualified cybersecurity  practitioners who also have an understanding of the unique challenges facing critical  infrastructure owners and operators.
As threats, vulnerabilities, and technology  environments evolve, the cybersecurity workforce must continue to adapt to design,  develop, implement, maintain and continuously improve the necessary cybersecurity  practices within critical infrastructure environments.
Various efforts, including the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), are  fostering the education and training of a cybersecurity workforce for the future and  establishing an operational, sustainable and continually improving cybersecurity education  approach to provide a pipeline of skilled workers for the private sector and government.
Organizations must understand their current and future cybersecurity workforce needs  and develop hiring, acquisition, and training resources to raise the level of technical  competence of those who build, operate, and defend data, systems, and networks  delivering critical infrastructure services.
Building on several years’ work with the Department of Defense (DoD) and the Department  of Homeland Security (DHS), and via extensive public-private partnerships, NIST has  published the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NICE Framework).16 The NICE  Framework provides a fundamental reference resource for describing and sharing  information about cybersecurity work roles, the discrete tasks performed by staff within  those roles, and the knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) needed to complete the tasks                                                     15 [LINK] http://cyberseek.org/ - Interactive jobs heat map and career pathways portal  16 [LINK] https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181       6   DRAFT   successfully.
The NICE Framework provides a common lexicon to categorize and describe  cybersecurity work, improving communication about how to identify, recruit, develop, and  retain cybersecurity staff.
Many of the outcomes described in the Cybersecurity Framework Core are directly related  to the roles, activities, and responsibilities of organizational personnel.
The NICE  Framework provides a complementary approach, describing the work roles that support  accomplishment of the Cybersecurity Framework outcomes.
In using the Cybersecurity  Framework’s steps to develop a measurable action plan, organizations can identify the  specific tasks and KSAs needed by those who will fulfill the functions, categories, and  subcategories described in the Cybersecurity Framework Core.
Appendix D.1 of the NICE  Framework includes examples of this integration.
Through NICE, NIST promotes cybersecurity workforce development activities via a public  working group structure.17 These activities may include further definition of how NICE  Framework work roles, tasks, and KSAs help to fulfill Cybersecurity Framework objectives.
Additional future activities are expected to include:   •  Continue to extend and integrate NICE activities across critical infrastructure   sectors to raise awareness of workforce development tools;   •  Emphasize coordination of K-12, higher education, and local employers in regions   •   across the nation;  Identify and support applied research opportunities in areas including  cybersecurity education, training, and workforce; and   •  Convene conferences, workshops, webinars, and other events that support the   development of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce resources; and   •  Evolve NICE publications and resources as informed by the above activities.
Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management   Supply chains consist of organizations that design, produce, source, and deliver products  and services.
All organizations are part of, and dependent upon, product and service supply  chains.
Supply chain risk is an essential part of the risk landscape that should be included  in organizational risk management programs.
Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) is the process of identifying, assessing, and  mitigating the risks associated with the distributed and interconnected nature of  technology product and service supply chains.
It covers the entire lifecycle of a system  (including design, development, distribution, deployment, acquisition, maintenance, and  destruction) as supply chain threats and vulnerabilities may intentionally or  unintentionally compromise a technology product or service at any stage.
Although many organizations may have robust internal risk management processes, supply  chain criticality and dependency analysis, collaboration, information sharing, supplier  management, and trust mechanisms remain a challenge.
Organizations can struggle to  identify their risks and prioritize their actions leaving the weakest links susceptible to  penetration and disruption.
Supply chain risk management, especially product and service                                                     17 [LINK] https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/about/working-group        7   DRAFT   integrity, is an emerging discipline characterized by diverse perspectives, disparate bodies  of knowledge, and fragmented standards and best practices.
Increasing adoption of supply chain risk management standards, practices and guidelines  requires greater awareness and understanding of the risks associated with the time- sensitive interdependencies throughout the supply chain, including in and between critical  infrastructure sectors/subsectors.
This understanding is vital to enable organizations to  assess their risk, prioritize, and allow for timely mitigation.
In recent years, the private-public supply chain community has advanced both technical  guidance and related tools to support better management of supply chain risks.
Some of  these activities culminated in the October 2015 release of NIST SP 800-161, Supply Chain - Risk Management Practices for Federal Information Systems and Organizations,18 which  provides guidance on identifying, assessing, and mitigating supply chain risks at all  organizational levels.
The July 2017 draft Criticality Analysis Process Model (draft NISTIR  817919) was engineered to work in conjunction with the SP 800-161 concepts.
5 - Security and  Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations20 controls.
NIST, the General  Services Administration (GSA), and the University of Maryland Robert H. Smith School of  Business continue to collaborate and learn from CyberChain,21 a Web tool for measuring  and assessing supply chain risk.
International standards also advanced C-SCRM and related topics with stakeholders.
Of  note, ISO/IEC 2703622 was published in April 2014 to help organizations address  Information Security for Supplier Relationships, and ISO/IEC 2024323 was released in  September 2015 to guide organizations on how to Mitigate Maliciously Tainted and  Counterfeit Products.
However, challenges remain, particularly in organizational awareness of supply chain risks  as well as awareness about the standards, best practices, guidance, and related tools  available for use to mitigate many of these risks.
As information and maturity around C-SCRM advances, NIST will remain focused on  identifying, evaluating and developing effective technologies, tools, techniques, practices  and guidance that help secure an organization’s supply chain.
Future activities will engage stakeholders to:    •  Encourage broad industry engagement and leadership in supply chain risk   management discussions and activities;   •  Promote the mapping of existing supply chain risk management standards, practices   •   and guidelines to the Framework Core;  Identify challenges in Framework adoption and determine appropriate support to  enable effective supply chain risk management;                                                     18 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-161.pdf   19 [LINK] https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8179/draft  20 [PDF] http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-53/sp800-53r5-draft.pdf   21 [LINK] https://cyberchain.rhsmith.umd.edu  22 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/59648.html   23 [LINK] https://www.iso.org/standard/67394.html       8   DRAFT   •  Determine the key challenges to supply chain risk management (e.g., identifying and   understanding mission critical functions and their dependencies, and conducting  and validating prioritization) to enable more effective Framework implementation;  and   •  Evolve the NIST supply chain and criticality publications as informed by the above   activities.
Federal Agency Cybersecurity Alignment    Several federal requirements directly apply to how federal agencies implement  cybersecurity and the Framework:   •  The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)24 requires federal   agencies to implement agency-wide programs to provide information security for  the information and information systems that support the operations and assets of  the agency, including those provided or managed by another agency, contractor, or  other source;   •  The July 2016 update of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) A-130 Circular,25   which establishes the complementary relationship between the NIST Risk  Management Framework and the Cybersecurity Framework;   •  Section 1(c)(ii) of the May 2017 Executive Order (EO) 13800 - Strengthening the   Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure26 - requires each  federal agency to use the Cybersecurity Framework to manage cybersecurity risk;  and   •  The May 2017 OMB Memorandum 17-25,27 which provides EO 13800 reporting   guidance to federal agencies.
While the Framework was developed with critical infrastructure owners and operators as  the primary stakeholders, federal standards and guidelines were often cited by non-federal  participants during development of the Framework as useful in managing cybersecurity  risk.
For that reason, the Framework includes controls from NIST SP 800-53 -Security and  Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, as informative  references in the Framework Core.
To assist federal agencies with integrating the Cybersecurity Framework and the Risk  Management Framework, NIST issued a discussion draft of SP 800-37 - Revision 2, Risk  Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations, 28 which includes  incorporation of key Cybersecurity Framework, privacy risk management and systems  security engineering concepts.29 NIST held an open workshop for additional stakeholder                                                     24 [LINK] https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/senate-bill/2521/text   25 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/circulars/A130/a130revised.pdf   26 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/05/11/presidential-executive-order-strengthening- cybersecurity-federal   27 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/M-17-25.pdf   28 [PDF] https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-37/rev-2/draft/documents/sp800-37r2-discussion- draft.pdf   29 [LINK] https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-160/final        9   DRAFT   engagement and feedback on the discussion draft of the Risk Management Framework,  including its consideration of the Cybersecurity Framework.
NIST issued draft report NISTIR 8170 - The Cybersecurity Framework: Implementation  Guidance for Federal Agencies30 to support agency heads and senior cybersecurity  leadership in Framework implementation planning.
By leveraging  NISTIR 8170, agencies can better understand how to implement the Framework in  conjunction with other NIST cybersecurity risk management standards and guidelines.
To advance and evolve an integrated federal approach to cybersecurity risk management,  NIST is also updating its suite of cybersecurity and privacy risk management publications  (e.g., SP 800-39 - Managing Information Security Risk31) to provide additional guidance on  how to integrate implementation of the Framework.
Similarly, the larger suite of NIST  security and privacy risk management publications will be updated in consideration of  NISTIR 8170 feedback and general Framework value.
Anticipated future NIST activities include:   •  Reconcile public comments and publishing final versions of NISTIR 8170 and SP   •   800-37 revision 2; and  Identify additional areas of alignment between existing and emerging standards,  guidelines, frameworks, and other programs (e.g., Continuous Diagnostics and  Mitigation) and the Framework.
Governance and Enterprise Risk Management   From its inception, the Cybersecurity Framework was designed to focus on and encourage  a risk management approach within and among enterprises.
As part of that strategy, NIST  has aimed to support senior executive decision making with regard to cybersecurity risks.
Additionally, private and public-sector participants involved in developing the Framework  recognized and stressed at the outset that leadership “buy-in” to the approach was crucial  to improving the nation’s cybersecurity.
At the federal level, the importance of active  engagement of senior leaders in cybersecurity risk management and the Cybersecurity  Framework, has been reinforced by a May 11, 2017, Executive Order.32   The Framework’s language, structure, and components offer a natural integration of  cybersecurity and enterprise risk management, enhancing senior executive decision  making and engagement.
More specifically, the Framework stages consideration of  cybersecurity in larger enterprise risk management discussion, and also enable easy  translation of how those larger enterprise risk decisions affect cybersecurity.
Those with                                                     30 [PDF] http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/nistir-8170/nistir8170-draft.pdf   31 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-39.pdf   32 [LINK] https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/05/11/presidential-executive-order-strengthening- cybersecurity-federal - The recent Executive Order 13800 on strengthening cybersecurity is another reinforcement  about the crucial role of the heads of organizations: “Effective risk management requires agency heads to lead  integrated teams of senior executives with expertise in IT, security, budgeting, acquisition, law, privacy, and  human resources.” That Order also directs: “Effective immediately, each agency head shall use The Framework  for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (the Framework) developed by the National Institute of  Standards and Technology, or any successor document, to manage the agency's cybersecurity risk.”        10   DRAFT   enterprise risk management responsibilities in an organization typically include C-suite  officers (chief executive officers, chief operating officers, chief financial officials, chief  information officers, etc.
), while directors within a board must govern the organization  through oversight of those officers.
Given the importance of supporting senior executive risk decisions, the Framework’s native  support of enterprise risk management, the close relationship between ERM and  governance, and the on-going focus of these topics in the larger ecosystem, Governance and  Enterprise Risk Management will be a Roadmap topic area.
For example, several organizations  representing the interests of business leaders have incorporated the Cybersecurity  Framework in relevant guidance.
These include: the National Association of Corporate  Directors, which has issued a Cyber Risk Oversight Handbook33 and the Kogod Cybersecurity  Governance Center.34 Key among the considerations which appear to be influential and  driving increased attention by boards and “C-suite” executives are the legal, regulatory, and  media implications of their organizations’ risk management approaches - and how  implementation of these strategies brings management of risk to practice.
As an added tool to help drive the enterprise risk management process as well as the  applicability of the Cybersecurity Framework at all levels within an organization, NIST  produced the Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder (BCEB), Version 1.0.
This self- assessment tool is intended to help organizations better understand the effectiveness of  their cybersecurity risk management efforts and identity improvement opportunities in the  context of their overall organizational performance.
The Builder blends organizational  assessment approaches from the Baldrige Performance Excellence Program with the  concepts and principles of the Cybersecurity Framework.
Developed with industry input,  including public comments on a draft version, the Builder was released in April 2017.
In the next one-to-three years NIST intends to continue and enhance its efforts to engage  the leadership ranks of private and public sector organizations, partnering with and  leveraging other organizations.
Among other things, NIST will engage stakeholders in  discussions about how best to:   •  Stage cybersecurity’s consideration in enterprise risk management decision making;  •  Describe the difference between corporate governance and board governance;  •  Determine how best to depict and describe the board-to-senior executive dialog;   and   •  Evolve NIST publications such as the BCEB and the Framework given the above   dialogs.
Identity Management   Identity Management solutions have continued to evolve and improve since the  Framework’s initial release, with both the public and private sectors making progress  toward developing and implementing stronger standards, processes, technologies, and  protocols.
These technologies are also being paired with biometric  technology to make strong authentication more common and user-friendly, and  increasingly, password-less.
While adoption is trending in the right direction, the rate falls  short of what is needed to best protect against cybersecurity threats, especially with “81 of  hacking-related breaches [leveraging] either stolen and/or weak passwords35.”   Although the use and adoption of identity technologies is evolving, challenges remain in  aligning technology with risk management processes.
This is exemplified by the plethora of  personal information now available on social media or due to massive breaches of  consumer data.
To better align technology and risk management processes, NIST published  a substantial 2017 update to the Special Publication 800-63 suite.
NIST also continues  development of associated implementation guides and National Cybersecurity Center of  Excellence (NCCoE) reference models.
Identity management needs to become more risk-aligned, adaptive, and contextual with  guidance capable of supporting flexibility, modularity, and agility – while never sacrificing  personal privacy to achieve better outcomes.
To support this, NIST continues to evolve  processes for its standards and guidance efforts, including increasing use of approaches  and tools to maximize stakeholder engagement and be responsive to a rapidly changing  threat landscape.
In addition, NIST will leverage the National Cybersecurity Center of  Excellence to bring together important identity management and cybersecurity  requirements that are needed to address specific business cybersecurity challenges.
To positively participate and impact the growing identity ecosystem, NIST will:   •   Inform the development and enhancement of standards, guidelines,  implementations and technology gaps through targeted NCCoE use cases, reference  implementations, and technology deployments;   •  Conduct focused research to better understand new and emerging technologies,   their impact on existing standards, and the implementation of identity management  solutions;   •  Pilot innovative identity proofing technologies and processes so that a range of   demographics can prove their identity remotely and access digital services;   •  Continue active participation in national and international identity management   standards, guidance, best practices, profiles, and frameworks to create an enhanced,                                                     35 [LINK] 2017 Verizon Data Breach Report Executive Summary,  http://www.verizonenterprise.com/resources/reports/rp_DBIR_2017_Report_execsummary_en_xg.pdf      12   DRAFT   interoperable suite of secure, privacy-enhancing solutions, including authentication  and authorization within the IoT; and   •  Continue to foster the growth, adoption, and scaling of technology, such as MFA and   identity proofing, by partnering with commercial, federal, and international  stakeholders to overcome adoption barriers;   •  Evolve NIST identity management guidelines and publications as informed by the   above activities.
4.8. International Aspects, Impacts, and Alignment   Globalization and advances in technology have driven unprecedented increases in  innovation, competitiveness, and economic growth.
Critical infrastructure has become  dependent on these enabling technologies for increased efficiency and new capabilities.
Many governments are proposing and enacting strategies, policies, laws, and regulations  covering information technology for critical infrastructure as a result.
Because many  organizations and most sectors operate globally or rely on the interconnectedness of the  global digital infrastructure, these requirements are affecting, or may affect, how  organizations operate, conduct business, and develop new products and services.
Diverse  or specialized requirements can impede interoperability, result in duplication, harm  cybersecurity, and hinder innovation.
In turn, this can significantly reduce the availability  and use of innovative technologies to critical infrastructures in all industries and hamper  the ability of organizations to operate globally and to effectively manage new and evolving  risks.
Currently, no common language or taxonomy exists among international entities relative to  cybersecurity.
Many countries are working to develop their own, unique standards and  best practices which may make interoperability at the international level a more  challenging and sometimes onerous process.
To this end, international collaboration and  alignment would lead to greater innovation and a more effective and efficient utilization of  resources.
Because the Framework references globally accepted standards, guidelines and  practice, organizations domiciled inside and outside of the United States can use the  Framework to efficiently operate globally and manage new and evolving risks.
In December 2014, the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 affirmed NIST’s role in  driving global alignment in consultation with international organizations, as well as  governments of other nations.
To support the law and Framework stakeholders, NIST has  engaged in international alignment through both bi-lateral dialogs with governments of  other nations and engagement with standards developing organizations.
NIST continues to actively engage with the international community in an effort to increase  utilization of the Cybersecurity Framework and further alignment with international  standards.
These efforts  have resulted in or supported some countries and international entities using the  Framework or considering adopting a similar approach towards cybersecurity.
For  example:            13   DRAFT   •  The Information-technology Promotion Agency (IPA) translation of the Framework   to Japanese;   •  The Italian National Framework for Cyber Security36 using the Framework as a   foundation;   •  The Israeli adaptation and translation of the Framework to Hebrew;  •  The Bermuda Cybersecurity Framework Workshop, where the Bermudian   government confirmed their use of the Framework and encouraged the voluntary  use of Framework in private sector; and   •  The Ontario Energy Board (OEB) using the Framework to measure cybersecurity   efforts of non-bulk electric organizations.37   NIST is also actively engaged with the ISO and IEC to map existing international standards  to the Framework.
This work is expected to culminate in the publication of an ISO/IEC  Technical Report summarizing that work.
NIST will expand its efforts to communicate the  intent and approach of the Framework to the international community, with the goal of  seeking greater alignment and use.
Among other things, NIST will:   •  Continue to engage foreign governments and international organizations directly to   explain the Framework and seek alignment of approaches when possible;   •  Work with industry stakeholders to assist with their international engagement; and  •  Exchange information and working with standards development organizations,   industry, and sectors to ensure the Framework alignment and compatibility with  existing and developing standards and practices.
Measuring Cybersecurity   Every organization wants to gain maximum value and effect for its finite cybersecurity- related investments.
This includes reducing risk and optimizing the potential reward of  cybersecurity.
Organizations frequently make go-ahead decisions, comparing scenarios  that differ in projected cost, and estimated benefit and risk reduction.
Providing more accurate and quantifiable answers to these questions requires an aligned,  modular, and systemic approach to cybersecurity measurement, so that measurement at  more technical levels is supportive of high-level decision making.
Since development work on the Framework was begun in 2013, measurement has been a  recurrent area of interest and much discussion.
That discussion, including a desire to have  better information and tools to assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity strategies and  actions, reflects the broader issue of measurement within the cybersecurity community.
This is an under-developed topic, one in which there is not even a standard taxonomy for  terms such as “measurement” and “metrics.” The development of reliable ways to measure  risk and effectiveness would be a major advancement and contribution to the cybersecurity  community.
NIST is initiating a cybersecurity measurement program focusing on aligning technical                                                     36 [LINK] http://www.cybersecurityframework.it   37 [PDF] https://www.oeb.ca/sites/default/files/OEB-CS-Framework-WhitePaper-20170601.pdf       14   DRAFT   measures to determine effect on high-level organizational objectives, as well as to support  decision making by senior executives and oversight by boards of directors.
The initiative  will build on existing research and approaches, and will involve consultation with the  research, business, and government sectors, including those already offering measures.
The  program will also rely on previous work such as NIST SP 800-55 - Performance  Measurement Guide for Information Security.38 Likely activities within this program include:   •  Research to understand challenges, insights, and gaps in cybersecurity   measurement;   •  Preliminary work to define a basic vocabulary and subdivide the diverse   cybersecurity measurement topic space;   •  Discussion of those work products and other critical topics at one or more public   workshops; and   •  Evolution of NIST SP 800-55 as informed by the above activities.
Privacy Engineering    A key challenge for the privacy field has been the difficulty of determining how to design  information technologies and systems that protect individuals’ privacy, and by extension,  civil liberties in an increasingly connected world.
The Fair Information Practice Principles  (FIPPs) - developed in the early stages of computerization and data aggregation to address  the handling of individuals’ personal information - have been used as a basis for a number  of laws, regulations, and frameworks in the U.S. and around the world.
The FIPPs, as  principles, provide an important set of general policy considerations, but lack the  quantifiable elements necessary for system engineers to develop, implement, and assess  privacy protections at a system level.
Although cybersecurity provides some degree of privacy protection, individuals’ privacy  cannot be achieved solely by securing personally identifiable information (PII).
Privacy  risks also can arise from the intentional or authorized processing of PII, including when  cybersecurity measures are processing PII to provide increased security.39 Research is  being conducted in the public and private sectors to improve current privacy practices, but  many gaps remain.
In particular, there are few identifiable technical standards or  implementation guidelines to mitigate the impact of cybersecurity activities on individuals’  privacy or civil liberties.
To address these circumstances, NIST is contributing to the development of the discipline  of privacy engineering as a bridge between privacy policy and system-level  implementation.
NIST has established a program for privacy engineering with the goals of  advancing 1) a lexicon to describe the field and 2) the development of widely adopted  frameworks, models, methodologies, tools, and standards.
In January 2017, NIST published  NISTIR 8062 - An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in Federal                                                     38 [LINK] https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-55/rev-1/final  39 [PDF] https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/cybersecurity-framework-021214.pdf  -  For example, security measures such as persistent activity monitoring can create concerns about the degree to which  information is revealed about individuals that is unrelated to cybersecurity purposes.
15   DRAFT      Systems.40 The publication provides a foundation for the concepts of privacy engineering  and risk management, and introduces a set of privacy engineering objectives and a privacy  risk model.
NIST also has developed a tool for organizations to use to conduct privacy risk  assessments based on this privacy risk model.
In addition, NIST is integrating guidance for  privacy into its existing guidance for cybersecurity risk management, including current  draft revisions to SP 800-37 - Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and  Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy and 800-53, Security  and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations.41/42 These activities  promote repeatable and measurable approaches to privacy protection that can be  communicated clearly across an organization and improve collaboration between the  privacy and security teams.
NIST will continue to work with stakeholders in the federal privacy community, academia,  and the private sector to develop frameworks, models, methodologies, tools, and standards  that can be used to achieve more effective privacy protections in systems.
NIST’s activities  will focus on building on its introductory work, including:   •  Expand integration of privacy guidance into additional NIST risk management   guidelines;   •  Engage with standards development organizations to advance privacy engineering   standards;     •  Work collaboratively with other NIST programs such as IoT Cybersecurity efforts to   advance integrated privacy and cybersecurity processes; and   •  Promote the use and improvement of tools and solutions to engineer privacy   protections into systems.
Referencing Techniques   Referencing Techniques has been added to this Roadmap to address the relationship of one  set of cybersecurity requirements, controls, or outcomes (“references”) to another, such as  defining the relationship between Framework outcomes and ISO 27001 requirements.
References  range far beyond the Framework Informative References.
However, Informative  References serve as an easy starting point for this topic.
To handle the changing and growing cybersecurity standards, industry and sector specific  recommended practices, technology specific implementation guides, and general guidelines  landscape, the Informative References must adapt.
These references serve as a translation  layer for the principles expressed in the categories/subcategories of the Cybersecurity  Framework Core.
As such, additional informative references will help organizations  address emerging needs when implementing the Cybersecurity Framework.
To enable expansion of the Informative Reference to exhaustive mappings and to expand  the number of Informative References, NIST is transitioning Informative References into an                                                     40 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2017/NIST.IR.8062.pdf   41 [PDF] https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-37/rev-2/draft/documents/sp800-37r2-discussion- draft.pdf   42 [PDF] https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/publications/sp/800-53/rev-5/draft/documents/sp800-53r5-draft.pdf    16   DRAFT      on-line format.
The resulting body of references is also viewed  as foundational for future work standardizing language, mapping formats, and researching  automation.
Envisioned Roadmap work items include:   •  Develop an anthology for describing the controls in a standardized format;  •  Develop a governance model for maintaining and administering online Informative   References;   •  Collaborate with the current Informative Reference document owners to expand   those mappings and make them available online;   •  Engage additional parties in development of online Informative References;  •  Discuss referencing language, format, process, and automation with stakeholders at   upcoming workshops;  Integrate existing technology security practices to security control catalog; and   •  •  Determine appropriate elements of the above dialog to include in NIST publications.
However, there are almost 29 million U.S. small  businesses and nearly half of the U.S. private sector working population is employed in a  small business.43 These businesses produce approximately 46 percent of our Nation’s  private sector output and create 64 percent of all net new private sector jobs in the  country.
An information security  incident can be detrimental to the business, its customers, employees, business partners  and many others.
It is important that small business leaders understand and have effective  approaches to manage risks to their information, systems and networks.
To address this need, NIST published NISTIR 7621 Revision 1 - Small Business Information  Security.44 This report provides guidance on how small businesses can implement basic  security for their information, systems, and networks and gives a basic overview of  information security.
NIST is also collaborating with the National Cyber Security Alliance  (NCSA)45 on outreach avenues to small- and medium-sized businesses (SMBs).
This  includes participating in a webinar series to explain NIST cybersecurity resources to SMBs.
NIST will collaborate with public and private sector partners to embark on a “listening  tour” to hear first-hand from SMB owners about their cybersecurity needs.
Based on these  discussions, NIST will work with federal stakeholders and SMB owners and operators to  address gaps in cybersecurity resources.
These will leverage the capabilities of others and may include:                                                     43 [LINK] https://www.sba.gov/   44 [PDF] http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2016/NIST.IR.7621r1.pdf   45 [LINK] https://staysafeonline.org/       17   DRAFT   •  Self-help educational material such as instructional presentations, pamphlets,   guidance, and videos;   •  Awareness of the importance and impact of cybersecurity and resources that help  address cybersecurity through events and expanded use of social media channels;  and  “Starter” Framework Profiles specific to SMBs, tailored toward risk management of  business processes important to small business owners and reducing effort  necessary to customize Framework.
•   18   DRAFT         	               Governance of Cybersecurity:   2015 Report        How Boards & Senior Executives   Are Managing Cyber Risks             Author:  Jody R. Westby   Adjunct Professor, Georgia Institute of Technology  CEO, Global Cyber Risk LLC    October 2, 2015     Research Sponsors:     	                           © 2015 by Jody R. Westby and Georgia Tech Information Security Center   All rights reserved.
Georgia Tech Information Security Center    Georgia Institute of Technology   Klaus Advanced Computing Building    266 Ferst Drive   Atlanta, GA 30332-0765  USA    (404) 385-2879  •  (404) 894-1155  (Fax)   Wenke Lee, Ph.D., Director       Jody R. Westby, Esq.
Adjunct Professor, Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Computer Science,     CEO, Global Cyber Risk LLC  5125 MacArthur Blvd., NW   Third Floor   Washington, DC  20016   (202) 255-2700  •  (202) 537-5073 (Fax)                           	             ii	        T Contents  Table of Contents    Table of Contents ............................................................................................................. iii  Abbreviations .................................................................................................................. iv  About Georgia Tech and GTISC ...................................................................................... 1  About Jody R. Westby ...................................................................................................... 2  About Financial Services Roundtable .............................................................................. 3  About Forbes .................................................................................................................... 3  About Palo Alto Networks ................................................................................................. 4  Executive Summary ......................................................................................................... 5  About the Survey ............................................................................................................ 11  Introduction ............................................................................................................... 12  I.
Recommendations ................................................................................................... 37  Endnotes ........................................................................................................................ 39          	        iii	                                                       Abbreviations  Abbreviations      ABA    ASIS    CEO    CERT    CFO    CIO    CIP    CISO    CMU    CoE    COO    CPO    CRO  CSO    CyLab      D&Os  EU    FFIEC    FTC      FSR   GLBA    GTISC    GTRI    HITECH Act  HIPAA    ISACA      ISO    ISS  IEC      IT    ITU  ITGI    NERC      NIST    OIT    PII  PwC      R&D    SEC  SOD      U.S.                                                                                                                        American Bar Association  American Society for Industrial Security  Chief Executive Officer  Computer Emergency Response Team  Chief Financial Officer  Chief Information Officer  Critical Infrastructure Protection  Chief Information Security Officer  Carnegie Mellon University  Council of Europe  Chief Operating Officer  Chief Privacy Officer  Chief Risk Officer  Chief Security Officer  Carnegie Mellon CyLab  Directors & Officers  European Union  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council  Federal Trade Commission  Financial Services Roundtable  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act  Georgia Tech Information Security Center  Georgia Tech Research Institute  Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health   Act  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  Information Systems Audit and Control Association  International Organization for Standardization   Institutional Shareholder Services  International Electrotechnical Commission  Information Technology  International Telecommunication Union  Information Technology Governance Institute  North American Electric Reliability Corporation  National Institute of Standards & Technology  Office of Information Technology (Georgia Tech)  Personally Identifiable Information  PricewaterhouseCoopers  Research & Development  Securities and Exchange Commission  Segregation of Duties  United States             	        iv	        About Georgia Tech and GTISC     Located in Atlanta, Georgia, the Georgia Institute of Technology is a leading research  university committed to improving the human condition through advanced science and technology.
Ranked as the #7 best public university, Georgia Tech provides a focused, technologically based  education to more than 21,500 undergraduate and graduate students.
Its  mission is to invent the intellectual and architectural basis for computing; to educate students in the  foundations and future of the field; to understand and realize the potential of computation in algorithms,  systems, software, architecture, and networks; to invent and enable networks, computers, and platforms  that advance our knowledge and benefit society; to educate practitioners and future leaders of computer  science; and to be at the forefront of research, education, and service based on computer science.
As a leading technological university, Georgia Tech has more than 100 centers focused on  interdisciplinary research that consistently contribute vital research and innovation to American  government, industry, and business.
Comprised of faculty, staff, and students from multiple units across campus, the Georgia Tech Information  Security Center (GTISC) is a catalyst for initiating a wide range of activities in both research and  education.
Members come from the College of Computing, College of Engineering, College of Business,  College of Liberal Arts, the Georgia Tech Office of Information Technology (OIT) and the Georgia Tech  Research Institute (GTRI).
Developed  from Senator Nunn’s concept of educating citizens about important issues, the focus of the forum was the  critical and strategic role of information security to the business community, to private citizens, and to all  levels of government.
As the program for this forum was developed, it became increasingly clear that  Georgia Tech’s strengths in technology and policy, coupled with the pressing need for education and  research in information security, meant that the Institute had a responsibility to lead in this area.
1	        About Jody R. Westby    Drawing upon a unique combination of more than 20 years of technical, legal, policy, and business  experience, Ms. Westby provides consulting and legal services to public and private sector clients in the  areas of privacy, cybersecurity, breach management and incident response, and cyber governance.
Her  services include trusted advisory services to boards and senior management, security risk assessments,  global compliance reviews, incident response planning, data mapping, and digital asset management.
Her  company, Global Cyber Risk LLC, is a strategic partner of Aon Global Risk Consulting and a preferred  provider of privacy and security consulting services to Reed Smith.
Ms. Westby serves as Adjunct Professor to the Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Computer  Science.
She authored Carnegie Mellon CyLab’s 2008, 2010, and 2012 Governance of Enterprise  Security Survey reports and was lead author of CMU’s Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation  Guide.1  Ms. Westby’s work on the governance responsibilities of boards and senior executives has been  showcased by the CISO Executive Network and Bloomberg BNA’s Privacy & Security Law Report.
Prior to founding Global Cyber Risk, Ms. Westby served as senior managing director for  PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) where she was responsible for information security, privacy, information  sharing, and critical infrastructure protection issues across the federal government.
She also was co-lead  in launching their outsourcing practice.
Before joining PwC, Ms. Westby founded the Work-IT Group, and  specialized in serving government and private sector clients on legal and regulatory issues associated  with information technology and online business.
Ms. Westby has advised government officials and  industry in countries around the world on the development of their legal frameworks for e-commerce and  information security.
She also practiced law with the New York firms of  Shearman & Sterling and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
Ms. Westby is a professional blogger for Forbes on cybersecurity, cybercrime, and privacy issues.
She is  co-chair of the American Bar Association’s (ABA) Privacy and Computer Crime Committee and was chair,  co-author and editor of its International Guide to Combating Cybercrime, International Guide to Cyber  Security, International Guide to Privacy, and Roadmap to an Enterprise Security Program (endorsed by  the Global CSO Council).
She is author of the Legal Guide to Cybersecurity Research and the Legal  Guide to Botnet Research, both published by the ABA.
She was editor and co-author of the 2010 UN  publication, The Quest for Cyber Peace.
Ms. Westby is co-chair of the ABA Cybercrime Committee  (Criminal Justice Section) and just completed three terms on the ABA President’s Cybersecurity Task  Force.
She served as co-chair of the World Federation of Scientists’ Permanent Monitoring Panel on  Information Security and was appointed to the United Nations’ ITU High Level Experts Group on Cyber  Security.
2	        About Financial Services Roundtable    Financial Services Roundtable (FSR) is the leading advocacy organization for America's financial services  industry.
With a 100-year tradition of service and accomplishment, FSR is a dynamic, forward-looking  association advocating for the top financial services companies, keeping them informed on the vital policy  and regulatory matters that impact their business.
FSR members include the leading banking, insurance, asset management, finance, and credit card  companies in America.
FSR’s members are financing the American economy - creating jobs, expanding  businesses, securing homes, businesses and retirement, insuring growth and building consumer  confidence.
At every level of  the government, FSR is working to ensure that our members' interests are well represented.
3	                  	     About Palo Alto Networks     As the next-generation security company, Palo Alto Networks is leading a new era in cybersecurity by  safely enabling all applications and preventing advanced threats against tens of thousands of  organizations around the world.
We are the fastest-growing security company in the market because of  our deep expertise, commitment to innovation, and game-changing security platform.
Today’s cybersecurity challenges   •  Lack of focus on cyber breach prevention puts critical assets at risk.
Building security that   simply detects threats, with no other option than incident response, is too little, too late.
•  Security has been categorized as simply an IT problem for too long.
Cyber risks are too  important not to discuss in the boardroom – this is an existential issue for the entire enterprise.
•  Too many point security products leave gaping holes in security postures.
Piecemeal   security systems and point products that don’t share context across the entire cyberattack  lifecycle are inadequate.
Most enterprise   security teams are not resourced to manually handle thousands of daily alerts.
Our unique answer  The Palo Alto Networks Next-Generation Security Platform addresses these challenges by combining  visibility across your network, endpoint, and cloud, with deep threat intelligence to provide automated  protection and prevent cyberattacks, not just detect them.
With this capability our platform enables  customers to:   •  Prevent successful cyberattacks by eliminating gaping holes in an organization’s cybersecurity  posture.
Our platform natively provides the right security capabilities and applies them at the right  place, addressing all stages of the attack lifecycle.
•  Safely enable applications and business operations because protection is based on fine- grained visibility, correlation, and control of what matters most in today’s modern computing  environments: applications, users, and content, not just ports and IP addresses.
•  Eliminate the age-old compromise between security posture and business performance  that organizations have faced for years because it is natively architected to operate in modern  networks with new technology initiatives such as cloud computing, software-defined data centers,  and mobility in mind.
4	        Executive Summary    It has long been recognized that directors and  officers have a fiduciary duty to protect the assets  of their organizations.
Today, this duty extends to  digital assets and has been expanded by laws and  regulations that impose specific privacy and  cybersecurity obligations on companies.
This is the fourth survey that Jody Westby has  conducted on how boards of directors and senior  management are governing the security of their  organizations’ information, applications, and  networks (digital assets).
First conducted in 2008,  2010, and 2012 for Carnegie Mellon CyLab, and now through the Georgia Tech Information Security  Center (GTISC), the surveys are intended to detect trends and measure the extent to which cyber  governance is improving.
The 2012 and 2015 surveys are global governance surveys, enabling a  comparison of responses from industry sectors and geographical regions.
Additionally,  boards are now undertaking  key oversight activities related  to governance of  cybersecurity....”   The GTISC survey is based upon results received from 121  respondents at the board or senior executive level from 1,927  Forbes Global 2000 companies (6% response rate).
The respondents also included  strong representation from board committees: 25% of the  respondents serve on a board Risk Committee, 19% serve on a  Governance, Compliance, or Ethics Committee, and 14% were  members of an Audit Committee.
The three previous surveys revealed that boards were not actively  managing cyber risks and failed to understand the linkage between information technology (IT) risks and  enterprise risk management.
The 2015 survey revealed that nearly two-thirds (63%) of boards are actively addressing and governing  computer and information security, whereas only about a third were in previous surveys (33% in 2012,  39% in 2010).
Boards are now undertaking key oversight activities related to governance of  cybersecurity, such as reviewing security program assessments and top-level policies; assigning roles  and responsibilities for privacy and security; and receiving regular reports on breaches and IT risks.
The  weakest areas of cyber governance involved reviewing security budgets and assigning  roles/responsibilities for key privacy and security personnel.
5	                  	     The 2015 report shows a significant shift in the number of boards reviewing cyber insurance, indicating  that cyber risks are being considered as an enterprise risk.
Only about half of the respondents (47-54%) indicated that they had  quantified their business interruption and loss exposure from cyber events.
Almost all boards are reviewing risk assessments, and an increasing number of them are hiring outside  experts to help with risk assessments and risk management.
The highest degree of attention was being paid to cyber risks associated  with supplier relationships.
Sixty-three percent (63%) of respondents said their board regularly or  occasionally reviewed annual security program assessments.
Boards also are seeking more third party assistance in managing cyber and IT risks.
Risk, security, and IT experience were ranked most valuable when  recruiting for board directors, right after financial and management  experience.
Boards and senior management are improving in establishing key  positions for security and risk officers, but lag in establishing privacy  positions.
Organizations tend to overlap privacy and security responsibilities, not understanding the inherent  segregation of duties (SOD) issues associated with assigning responsibility for both roles to one person.
More than half of the CISOs (51%) and a quarter of the CSOs (26%) indicated that they are responsible  for both privacy and security.
Although this is down from 77% of CISOs and 30% of CROs in 2010 having  responsibility for both privacy and security, it is a risk flag.
CPOs are rarely assigned security  responsibilities.
In 2015, 40% of the  respondents indicated that the CISO/CSO reported to the CIO in their organization.
The surveys from 2010, 2012 and 2015 show little change in this  reporting structure, and changes to establish independent reporting likely will require board action.
“Another positive sign  from the survey was  the importance that  boards are placing  upon IT and  security/risk expertise  in board recruitment.”      	     6	        Another positive sign is the continued growth in cross-organizational committees or teams responsible for  managing privacy and security issues across the company.
In 2008, only 17% of the respondents  indicated their organization had a cross-organizational team, but in 2015, 79% of the respondents said  their company has formed such a committee or team.
Regional Conclusions   •  North American (85%) and European (58%) boards are paying more attention to computer and  information security, up from 40% and 19%, respectively, in 2012.
•  The biggest jump in board attention to cyber insurance was in North America, where attention  doubled from 35% in 2012 to 70% in 2015.
•  All geographic regions had high board involvement in reviewing risk assessments (91-92%), but   the North American region relied more heavily (59%) on outside experts to help with risk  assessments and risk management.
•  Survey respondents indicated a 35% leap in the percentage of North American boards   considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major supplier relationships, putting it on par  with Europe (64-62%).
In following best practices for cyber governance, the survey results indicated that Asian boards  did best in reviewing annual budgets, roles and responsibilities, and top-level policies, but North  American boards excelled in reviewing risk reports, breach and incident reports, and security  program assessments.
•   •  The survey revealed that Asia was far ahead of North America and Europe in understanding the  importance of having a Risk Committee separate from the board Audit Committee, with 73% of  Asian respondents reporting their organization had a Risk Committee.
•  The value of risk and security experience for board service outranked IT experience in every  region.
The respondents indicated that North American and European boards valued risk and  security expertise second only to financial and management experience.
Asian respondents  valued legal expertise slightly more than risk and security.
•  North America and Europe are ahead of Asia in assigning key roles and responsibilities for   privacy and security.
•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities for a CISO/CSO tended to be on the decline in   North America and Asia, but on the increase in Europe.
7	                  	     •  All geographic regions indicated that 65% or more organizations have a cross-organizational   team.
Industry Sector Conclusions   The 2015 survey confirmed the 2012 report’s finding that, overall, the financial sector has better privacy  and security practices than other industry sectors.
The 2015 survey indicated significant improvements in  the energy/utilities and industrial sectors, which often had the lowest scores in the 2012 survey.
•  The 2015 survey revealed large increases in attention to cyber issues across industry sectors.
The industrial sector had the largest improvement in oversight of computer and information  security, with a 37% increase over 2012 (50% v. 13%).
•  Vendor management is receiving more attention in every sector, with the financial sector leading   on this issue.
•  The survey revealed a substantial increase in the percentage of industrial sector boards that are   reviewing risk assessments (100% in 2015, up from 63% in 2012).
The energy/utilities and  financial sectors rely on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management  (62%) more than other sectors.
•  The percentage of financial sector boards considering cyber risks when reviewing supplier   relationships shot up to 64% from 38% in 2012.
Similarly, board attention to cyber risks  associated with outsourcing agreements increased in every sector except IT/telecom.
•  The financial sector had the highest percentage of board involvement in every best practice area   except reviewing roles and responsibilities of key privacy and security personnel.
Across the  board, the respondents from every sector indicated significant improvements in board  governance of cybersecurity through increased activity in every best practice area.
•  The financial sector far exceeds other industry sectors in having a board Risk Committee   separate from the Audit Committee, with 86% of boards in that sector having a separate Risk  Committee.
The industrial  sector was lowest with 44% of boards having a Risk/Security Committee, and the energy/utilities  sector was only slightly ahead at 46%.
Industry sectors also increased their usage of outside experts by Risk Committees, with dramatic  jumps in every sector except the financial sector, which was already the leader in this area and  remains so at 38%.
•   •  The energy/utilities and financial sectors place risk and security experience in a strong third place   when valuing experience in the recruitment of directors, immediately following financial and  management experience.
The IT/telecom and Industrial sectors placed a higher priority on other  areas, such as academic and scientific experience.
•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities in a single security role occurs in all industry   sectors.
Energy/utilities and industrial sectors never assign security responsibilities, however, to a  CPO.
All industry sectors except IT/Telecom have more than half (51-60%) of CISOs saddled  with both privacy and security responsibilities.
The IT/Telecom sector dropped from 78% of  CISOs with dual responsibilities in 2012 to a third (33%) in 2015, whereas the industrial sector  went the other way, jumping from only 25% of CISOs assigned dual responsibilities in 2012 to  60% in 2015.
•  CISO/CSO reporting to the CIO is on the rise in every industry sector except energy/utilities.
•  At least 81% of all industry sectors had a cross-organizational team, except energy/utilities, which   lagged behind at 62%.
RECOMMENDATIONS    The survey revealed that governance of enterprise security has moved considerably since the 2008,  2010, and 2012 surveys, but gaps remain in critical areas.
If boards and senior management take the  following 12 actions, they could significantly improve their organizations’ security posture and reduce risk:  1.
Establish a board Risk Committee separate from the Audit Committee and assign it responsibility  for enterprise risks, including IT risks.
Recruit board directors with cybersecurity, IT governance,  and risk management expertise.
Ensure that privacy and security roles within the organization are separated and that   responsibilities are appropriately assigned.
The CIO, CISO/CSO, and CPO should report  independently to senior management.
Evaluate the existing organizational structure and establish a cross-organizational team that is   required to meet at least monthly to coordinate and communicate on privacy and security issues.
This team should include senior management from human resources, public relations, legal, and  procurement, as well as the CFO, the CIO, CISO/CSO, CRO, the CPO, and business line  executives.
4.  Review existing top-level policies to ensure they set a “tone from the top” and create a culture of   cybersecurity and responsibility for systems and data.
Organizations can enhance their  reputation by valuing cybersecurity and the protection of privacy and emphasizing it as a  corporate value.
5.  Review assessments of the organization’s cybersecurity program and ensure the program   comports with best practices and standards and includes incident response, breach notification,  business continuity/disaster recovery, and crisis communications plans.
Ensure that privacy and cybersecurity requirements for vendors (including law firms and cloud   9	     and outsource providers) are based upon key aspects of the organization’s cybersecurity program               	     and includes annual audits and control requirements.
Carefully review vendor notification  procedures in the event of a breach or security incident.
Conduct an annual audit of the organization’s enterprise cybersecurity program, to be reviewed   by the Audit Committee.
Conduct a separate annual risk assessment of the cybersecurity program and effectiveness of   controls, to be reviewed by the board Risk Committee, and ensure that identified gaps or  weaknesses are addressed.
Require regular reports from senior management on the status of the cybersecurity program,   remediation activities, and recent incidents.
Require annual board review of the budget for the cybersecurity program and its linkage to cyber   risk management.
Evaluate cyber risks and potential business interruption and loss exposure costs and review   adequacy of cyber insurance coverage.
Tim Pawlenty, CEO of the Financial Services Roundtable,  and Mark McLaughlin, CEO of Palo Alto Networks, to directors and officers of Forbes Global 2000  companies, asking them to complete a brief survey designed to help GTISC understand how boards and  business leaders are managing cyber risks.
The GTISC 2015 report on Governance of Cybersecurity is based upon 121 responses, representing a  response rate of 6% out of a total of 1,927 surveys (based on one per company), which is equivalent to  the 2012 survey.
Thirty-four  percent (34%) of the respondents are CEO or president of their organization and 12% are board chairs.
Since respondents may serve on several boards, the survey asked them to select only one organization  as the focus of their responses and to base all of their answers on that one organization.
GTISC and Jody Westby wish to gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Alison Hawkins, Vice President  of Communications for the Financial Services Roundtable, who assisted in the finalization of this report,  and Aneesh Khan, an employee of the Georgia Tech Information Security Center, who assisted in the  calculation of the survey results and provided graphics assistance.
PURPOSE OF THE GOVERNANCE SURVEY    This is the fourth survey conducted by Jody Westby to determine the degree to which boards and senior  executives are governing privacy and security risks within their organizations.
As Adjunct Professor at Georgia Tech, she conducted the 2015 survey through the Georgia Tech  Information Security Center (GTISC).
The surveys have remained consistent to enable the detection of  trends and:   •  Determine the degree to which boards and senior executives are exercising governance over   cyber risks and implementing effective cyber risk strategies;      •  Ascertain the board and organizational structure that is established for such governance; and  •   Identify the degree to which companies are following best practices for securing their digital  assets and establishing cybersecurity programs.
D&O responsibility for  cyber risks emerged with certainty following the Target breach in December 2013.
Following Target, the multi-pronged attack on Sony Entertainment that resulted in (1) destruction of data,  (2) disruption of networks, (3) theft of valuable intellectual property (movies), and (4) the theft and  disclosure of highly confidential internal communications nearly brought Sony to its knees – the clear  objective of the attackers.
The dependency of all organizations upon information technology (IT) systems and global networks has  extended governance responsibilities to the use of IT and the protection of data and systems.
The IT Governance Institute (ITGI) states that:   IT governance is the responsibility of the board of directors and executive management.
It is  an integral part of enterprise governance and consists of the leadership and organizational  structures and processes that ensure that the organization’s IT sustains and extends the  organization’s strategies and objectives.2      Cybersecurity governance has now evolved into an international standard.
The International Organization  for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) have developed a standard  for governance of information security, ISO/IEC 27014.
The standard sets out roles for both “executive  management” and the “governing body.”  The governing body is the “person or group of people who are  accountable for the performance and conformance of the organization.”3  Executive management is  responsible for implementing the strategies and policies set by the governing body.
The standard  explains what this governance means:          	        12	        Governance of information security needs to align objectives and strategies for  information security with business objectives and strategies, and requires compliance  with legislation, regulations and contracts.
It should be assessed, analyzed and  implemented through a risk management approach, supported by an internal control  system.4      “It has long been  recognized that D&Os  have a fiduciary duty to  protect the assets of their  organizations.
Today, this  duty extends to ‘digital  assets’ – information,  applications, networks.”   It has long been recognized that D&Os have a fiduciary duty to protect  the assets of their organizations.5  Today, this duty extends to “digital  assets” – information, applications, and networks.
The 1996 Delaware  Caremark Derivative Litigation case set forth important case law  regarding a board’s duty to ensure that it has adequate information  flows on risks.
The court noted, “a director's obligation includes a duty  to attempt in good faith to assure that a corporate information and  reporting system, which the board concludes is adequate, exists, and  that failure to do so under some circumstances may, in theory at least,  render a director liable for losses caused by non-compliance with  applicable legal standards.”6  The boards need to ensure they have  adequate information flows and reporting on IT and cyber risks.
Regulatory pressure for better IT controls began with Sarbanes-Oxley, which requires both management  and external auditors to attest to the effectiveness of internal controls that provide meaningful assurance  about the security of information assets.7  Initially, the SEC took a narrow interpretation of Sarbanes- Oxley and focused only on financial controls.8  In late 2011, the Securities and Exchange Commission  (SEC) issued guidelines that require public companies to disclose the risk of cyber incidents if they  materially affect a registrant’s products, services, relationships with customers or suppliers, or competitive  conditions, or if they make an investment in the company speculative or risky.9  Following the Target  attack, the SEC opened examinations of several companies, probing whether they had properly handled  and disclosed recent cyber incidents.10  More recently, the SEC has expanded its view of security controls  and surveyed investment advisors and investment funds on their cybersecurity programs.
It subsequently  issued guidance for these firms in April 2015 on measures to consider when addressing cybersecurity  risks.11    The Federal Reserve always has taken a broad view of cyber risk management, recommending reviews  of all controls for cybersecurity, not just those related to financial reporting.
In 2015, the Federal Reserve  Board issued a Cybersecurity Assessment Tool, which incorporates principles from the Federal Financial  Institution Examination Council’s (FFIEC) Information Technology Examination Handbook, and includes a  comprehensive review of IT controls.
The explanation of the Tool includes a section on “Overview for  Chief Executive Officers and Boards of Directors.”12    The enactment of state and federal laws and regulations that impose specific privacy and security  requirements on targeted industry sectors and types of data continues to grow.
For example, the Gramm- Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Health  Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), and state and foreign breach  laws impose specific requirements pertaining to the security and privacy of data and networks and  reporting of incidents.
13	                  	     The pressure on critical infrastructure industry sectors to secure their systems according to best practices  and standards persists, with the U.S. energy sector already subject to the North American Electric  Reliability Corporation (NERC) Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) standards.13  In 2014, the National  Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) released a voluntary Framework for Improving Critical  Infrastructure, pursuant to Executive Order 13636, which set forth recommended measures for a  cybersecurity program.14    The Target breach brought D&O responsibility for governing cybersecurity front and center.
The claims  included breach of fiduciary duty, waste of assets, gross mismanagement, and abuse of control.16   Although a similar derivative suit against Wyndham Worldwide was dismissed, Target’s case and a more  recent one against Home Depot remain in the courts,17 and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals recently  reinstated a class action against Neiman-Marcus stemming from a breach, stating that “the Neiman  Marcus customers should not have to wait until hackers commit identity theft or credit-card fraud in order  to give the class standing, because there is an ‘objective reasonable likelihood’ that such an injury will  occur.”18    “We have entered a new  era of cybercrime; attacks  are targeting companies  and intending to inflict  harm.
Companies that do  not prepare for multi- pronged attacks are at  risk.”     Corporate data is at a higher risk of theft or misuse than ever before,  and the systemic nature of recent attacks has alarmed both industry  leaders and government officials around the world.
Managing these cyber risks now requires active oversight by boards  and senior executives.
Failure to properly govern cybersecurity and  privacy may result in legal actions by shareholders, victims, and  regulators.
Although Delaware case law provides strong protections to  D&Os under the business judgment rule and recent case law,19 harm caused by security breaches may  receive stricter scrutiny because:   •  Security best practices and standards are well-developed, harmonized, and widely available;  •  Many privacy and security laws require organizations to have an enterprise security program that   is regularly reviewed and tested;   •  The Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime,20 which has been signed by 54 countries and  ratified by 47 (including the U.S.), holds companies civilly, administratively, or criminally liable for  cybercrimes that benefit the company and were made possible due to the lack of supervision or  control by someone in a senior management position, such as an officer or director.
Article 9 of          	        14	        the European Union’s (EU) Council Framework Decision on attacks against information  systems,21 which applies to all 28 EU member countries, mirrors the CoE language.
At the core of cyber governance is the very difficult issue of (1) identifying the types of attacks that could  cause a material impact on the company’s bottom line or operations, and (2) quantifying the impact of  each type of attack.
As John Dempsey, global practice leader  at Aon Global Risk Consulting, recently noted:    Risk managers regularly model and quantify the potential severity of natural  catastrophes, and while there are parallels, cyber risk quantification poses unique  challenges.
We are now witnessing a paradigm shift in cyber loss exposure  assessment.
We are now realizing that a single well-planned malicious attack could  wipe billions from the balance sheet.22     Turning the tide against cybercriminals will require a dedicated, coordinated, vigilant effort and  comprehensive risk management strategies that must be reviewed and refined on an ongoing basis to  take into account changes in the threat environment, new innovations, and new legal and operational  considerations.
Internal respondents were:    CFO (38%)	      CEO or President (34%)   COO (9%)  Corporate Secretary (6%).
The majority of the Governance Survey respondents (73%) were from critical infrastructure  industry sectors, which increasingly face government pressure and/or regulatory compliance  requirements with respect to the security of their IT systems and data.
These survey respondents  represented:     Who'We'Asked'(By'Sector)'  •  Energy and utility companies – 11%  •  Financial sector – 35%   •  Health care – 2%   Industrials – 13%  •  IT and telecommunications companies – 12%.
•   ' Retailing,'2%'  '  Materials,'8%'   Other' Industry,'  8%'   Energy'/' U*li*es,'11%'  '  Industrials,'13%'  ' Financial,'35%'  '  7%'   Consumer,'  IT'/'Telecon,'12%'    The remaining 27% of respondents represented  consumer, materials, professional services, retailing,  and other types of companies.
Responses from four industry sectors had an 11% or  higher response rate and are compared in this report:  energy/utilities, financial, IT/telecom, and industrials.
Using the Forbes Global 2000 list, the 2015 survey  represents the second analysis of cyber governance  postures of major corporations around the world.
Regions  were aligned with those used by Internet World Stats  to enable analysis of responses against Internet  usage.23  Responses were primarily from three  geographical regions: North America (38%), Europe  (31%), and Asia (21%), although a smaller percentage  of responses also were received from Latin America,  Australia and Oceania, the Middle East, and Africa.
Responses from three regions are compared in this  report, with key countries noted below by Internet  usage:    North America: United States and Canada  Europe:  EU countries, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine, and Switzerland  Asia:  China, India, Japan, Indonesia, South Korea, Philippines, Vietnam, Pakistan, and Thailand.
16	           Finance   Industrials   IT/Telecom   Europe  Asia   Energy/Utilities   Industrials 13%  Industrials 15%   IT/Telecom 12%  IT/Telecom 12%   North   America  2015  NA 38%  2012  NA 40%   EU 31%  Asia 21%  Energy/Utilities 11%  Finance 35%  EU 30%  Asia 19%  Energy/Utilities 13%  Finance 33%   This report analyzes and compares 2015 and 2012 results by geographic region and industry sector.
These comparisons are particularly valid because the regional and industry respondent pools from the  2015 and 2012 surveys are similar.
Respondents by Geographic Region and Industry Sector              General survey questions may have comparisons from all four surveys (2015, 2012, 2010, 2008), but  some questions were not asked in 2008, so only the last three survey responses are compared for these.
FINDINGS     Oversight & Governance    The  findings  from  the  2015  Governance  Survey  indicate  that  boards  are  finally  paying  attention  to  cybersecurity  issues.
The  2010  and  2012  surveys  showed  that  boards  were  actively  addressing  risk  management, but attention to IT operations and computer and information security were two of the lowest  ranked issues.
In 2015, the percentage of boards actively addressing and governing computer and information  security nearly doubled from previous surveys.
The 2015 survey revealed that nearly two-thirds  (63%) of boards are actively addressing and governing computer and information security, whereas only  about a third were in previous surveys (33% in 2012, 39% in 2010).
Computer and information security  was the fifth highest rated issue of importance to boards in 2015, only surpassed by long term strategy  and operational goals, risk management, compliance, and mergers and acquisitions.
Risk#Management#  Boards#More#Ac8vely#Governing#Computer#and#IT#Security#  Board attention to IT  operations remained fairly  static: 29% of boards actively  addressed and governed IT  operations in 2015 and 2012  and 20% did in 2010.
The area receiving the least  attention was vendor  management, but this area  still showed a significant  increase in attention from 2%  in 2010, to 13% in 2012, and  to 20% in 2015.
The lack of  attention to vendor management is particularly concerning since this includes cloud providers and  outsourcing of IT operations and business processes.
Computer#and#IT#Security#   Vendor#Management#  IT#Opera8ons#  29%# 29%#  91%# 91%#  100%#  20%#  39%#  30%#  40%#  70%#  80%#  10%#  20%#  50%#  60%#  20%#  13%#  2%#  0%#  33%#  63%#  93%#  90%#  #            	     2015#  2012#  2010#  17	        2012  North  America   40%  30%  12%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    Issue Addressed  By Boards   2015  North   America  85%   39%  28%    Computer & Info Sec  IT Operations  Vendor Management   North American and European boards are paying more attention to computer and information  security, but Asia is static.
Regional Comparison Table:    Issues Actively Addressed  By Boards          The  2015  survey  also  revealed  large  increases  in  attention  to  cyber  issues  across  industry  sectors.
The  industrial  sector  had  the  largest  improvement  in  oversight  of  computer  and  information  security, with a 37% increase over 2012 (50% v. 13%).
The  2015  survey  also  indicated  that  vendor  management  is  receiving  more  attention  in  every  sector,  particularly energy/utilities, with a 23% increase over 2012, IT/telecom with a 15% increase, financial with  a 12% increase, and industrial with a 6% increase.
Boards in the financial sector pay the most attention to  vendor management, with 36% of the respondent boards actively addressing this issue.
Industry Comparison Table:  Issues Actively Addressed by Boards     38%  38%  24%  24%  19%   10%   58%     24%     13%    19%  19%  9%   Issue Addressed  By Boards   Computer & Info Sec  IT Operations  Vendor Management   2015  Energy/  Utilities  62%  23%  23%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  29%  14%  0%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   79%  48%  36%   44%  36%  28%   2015   IT/  Telecom   64%  14%  0%   2012  IT/  Telecom   31%  31%  15%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   50%  25%  6%   13%  19%  0%       The 2015 report shows a significant shift in the  number of boards reviewing cyber insurance,  indicating cyber risks are being considered as an  enterprise risk.
Coverage!for!Cyber!Risks!
18	        The biggest jump in board attention to cyber insurance was in North America, where attention  doubled from 35% in 2012 to 70% in 2015.
Regional Comparison Table:    Boards Reviewing Cyber Insurance   Coverage    24%    All of these critical infrastructure sectors showed a sizeable improvement in board attention to  cyber insurance coverage, with the utility/energy sector showing a gain of 48%.
Industry Comparison Table:  Boards Reviewing Cyber Insurance Coverage   Boards  Reviewing   Cyber  Insurance  Coverage     2012  North  America   2015  North   America   2012  Europe   2015   Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    70%    35%   45%   19%   27%   Boards Reviewing   Cyber Insurance Coverage      2015  Energy/  Utilities  62%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  14%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   52%   34%   2015   IT/  Telecom   29%   2012  IT/  Telecom   15%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   75%   38%     It is not certain that boards know what type of insurance to purchase or coverage limits.
When  asked if their company had quantified the business interruption or loss exposure from a cyber incident,  50% of the respondents said yes.
The regions and industry sectors were fairly consistent in their  responses to this question.
Boards$Review$Risk$Assessments$&$Rely$on$Outside$ExperEse$    Almost all boards are reviewing risk assessments and an increasing number of them are hiring  outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management.
Fifty-three percent (53%)  said their boards used outside experts  to help with risk assessments and risk  management, up from 46% in 2012  and 35% in 2010.
Board$Reviews$Risk$Assessments$$   Board$Uses$Outside$Experts$  100%#  93%$  53%$  89%$  46%$  82%$  35%$  10%#  20%#  30%#  40%#  50%#  80%#  70%#  60%#  90%#  0%#  2015$  2012$  2010$  Companies Quantifying Cyber Loss  Exposure & Business Interruption     North   America   54%   Europe  Asia   47%   50%     Energy /  Utilities  54%      Financial   60%   IT /   Telecom   43%   Industrials   44%          	        19	        2015   Europe   Board Risk  Management   2012  North  America   2015  North   America  91%    All geographic regions had high board involvement in reviewing risk assessments, but the North  American region relied more heavily on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk  management (59%) than other regions.
Regional Comparison Table:    Boards Reviewing Risk  Assessments & Obtaining   Outside Expertise        The survey revealed a substantial increase in the percentage of industrial sector boards that are  reviewing risk assessments (100% in 2015, up from 63% in 2012).
The energy/utilities and financial  sectors rely on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management (62%) more than  other sectors.
Industry Comparison Table:  Boards Reviewing Risk Assessments & Obtaining Outside Expertise  Board Risk Management   Reviewing  Assessments  Use Outside Experts   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    86%   67%   92%   42%   91%   88%   92%   59%   30%   47%   54%   Risk   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   2015   IT/  Telecom   2012  IT/  Telecom   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   2015  Energy/  Utilities  100%  62%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  93%  43%   Reviewing Risk Assessments  Use Outside Experts   93%  62%   97%  64%   86%  36%   85%  23%   100%  31%   63%  38%   Boards$Increase$Scru;ny$of$Cyber$Risks$in$Supplier$Rela;onships#    There was a substantial increase in board attention to cyber risks when reviewing major supplier  relationships.
There was not much change,  however, in boards considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major business partnerships,  acquisitions, or outsourcing relationships.
Outsourcing$Agreements$  Supplier$Rela;onships$  Business$Partnerships$  60%$ 57%$ 57%$  Acquisi;ons$  67%$ 67%$ 67%$  67%$ 67%$  39%$ 39%$  100%#  2015$  2012$  2010$  20%#  40%#  60%#  80%#  69%$  56%$  0%#  20	                  	             2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    2012  North  America   2015  North   America  62%   74%  62%  62%   Boards Considering  Cyber Risks When   Reviewing:  Business Partnership  Acquisition  Supplier Relationship  Outsourcing Agreements   Survey respondents indicated a 35% leap in the percentage of North American boards considering  cyber risks when reviewing potential major supplier relationships, putting it on par with Europe.
Regional Comparison Table:    Boards Considering   Cyber Risks            The percentage of financial sector boards considering cyber risks when reviewing supplier  relationships shot up to 64% from 38% in 2012.
Similarly, board attention to cyber risks associated  with outsourcing agreements increased in every sector except IT/telecom.
Overall, the industry sector  data was harder to analyze in this area; some areas of consideration received more attention regarding  cyber risks in 2015, while other went down from the 2012 survey.
For example, the percentage of  energy/utility boards considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major business partnerships  increased by 30%, whereas the percentage of industrial sector boards doing this declined by 17%.
Industry Comparison Table:  Boards Considering Cyber Risks   64%  68%  64%  79%   65%  76%  59%  82%   41%  47%  41%  65%   76%  53%  47%  59%   35%  65%  27%  62%   Boards Considering  Cyber Risks When   Reviewing:  Business Partnership  Acquisition  Supplier Relationship  Outsourcing Agreements   2015  Energy/  Utilities  50%  25%  63%  100%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  20%  40%  60%  80%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   73%  73%  64%  76%   73%  77%  38%  73%   2015   IT/  Telecom   78%  78%  44%  44%   2012  IT/  Telecom   44%  56%  44%  67%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   38%  88%  38%  63%   55%  45%  45%  55%     For the first time, the survey indicated that more boards regularly or occasionally engaged in  every area of governance best practices related to privacy and security.
Board and executive  governance activities considered best practices include reviewing security budgets, designating roles and  responsibilities for the management of privacy and security, developing and reviewing top-level policies,  receiving regular reports on security risks and incidents, reviewing annual risk assessments of the  security program, and reviewing cyber incident response plans.
These activities strengthen the security  posture of the company and help protect it against cyber attacks.
The weakest  governance areas were reviewing annual security budgets and roles and responsibilities for privacy and  security personnel; in 2012, respondents indicated more than half (53-56%) of the boards rarely or never  engaged in these two activities, which are central to any security program.
21	                  	                              46%$  2015$  2012$  2010$  Review$Incident$ Response$Plans$  ParBcipate$in$Test$  Scenarios$  Governance$Best$PracBces$D$Regularly$or$Occasionally$  82%$  72%$  71%$  74%$  67%$  61%$  63%$  56%$  90%#  80%#  70%#  60%#  50%#  40%#  30%#  20%#  10%#  0%#  64%$  53%$  39%$  47%$  36%$  36%$  50%$  41%$  23%$  Review$Security$  Budgets$  Review$Roles$and$ ResponsibiliBes$  Review$TopDLevel$  Policies$  Review$Risk$  Reports$  Receive$Incident$  Reports$  Review$Security$  Program$  Assessments$  When asked whether their boards receive information or are involved in activities related to these  best practices, respondents indicated that boards regularly or occasionally engaged in them:   •  Review annual budgets.
Fifty percent (50%) of respondents said their board regularly or   occasionally reviewed and approved annual budgets for privacy and IT security programs, up  from 41% in 2012, and 23% in 2010.
Forty-seven percent (47%) of respondents indicated their  board regularly or occasionally reviewed and approved roles and responsibilities of personnel  responsible for privacy and security risks, up from 36% in 2012 and 2010.
Sixty-four percent (64%) of respondents said their board regularly or  occasionally reviewed and approved top-level policies regarding privacy and security risks, up  from 53% in 2012 and 39% in 2010.
•  Receive reports on privacy and security risks.
Eighty-two percent (82%) of respondents said their   board regularly or occasionally received reports from senior management regarding privacy and  IT security risks, up from 72% in 2012 and 71% in 2010.
•  Receive reports on security breaches or loss of data.
Sixty-nine percent (69%) of respondents   said their board regularly or occasionally reviewed reports of security breaches or incidents  involving the disclosure of personally identifiable information or theft of corporate data, up from  61% in 2012.
•  Review annual computer security program assessments.
Sixty-three percent (63%) of   respondents said their board regularly or occasionally reviewed annual security program  assessments, up from 56% in 2012.
22	        71%  66%   50%   47%      47%      63%     42%   74%  77%   41%    48%   59%    2015   Asia   2012  Asia    14%   28%   58%   48%   65%   67%   81%   62%   41%   50%   69%  50%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015  North   America   2012  North  America   Boards Regularly or  Occasionally  Engaging in Best  Practices  Review Annual  Budgets  Review Roles &  Responsibilities   Review Top-level  Policies  Review Risk Reports  Review Security  Incident & Breach  Reports  Review Security  Program  Assessments  Review Incident  Response Plans  Participated in Test  Scenario Against  Response Plan   An analysis of the regional results indicated that Asian boards did best in reviewing annual  budgets, roles and responsibilities, and top-level policies, but North American boards excelled in  reviewing risk reports, breach and incident reports, and security program assessments.
Regional Comparison Table:    Boards Regularly or  Occasionally Engaging in  Best Practices                                The financial sector continues to live up to its reputation of having  the best security practices.
The sector had the highest percentage of  board involvement in every best practice area except reviewing roles and  responsibilities of key privacy and security personnel.
The increased  attention to cybersecurity issues is obvious when there are increases from  2012 of more than 30 percentage points.
Across the board, the  respondents from every sector indicated significant improvements in board  governance of cybersecurity through increased activity in every best  practice area.
Industry Comparison Table:  Boards Regularly or Occasionally Engaging in Best Practices  Boards Regularly or Occasionally  Engaging in Best Practices   “The increased  attention to  cybersecurity issues is  obvious when there  are increases from  2012 of more than 30  percentage points.”   2015  Industrial   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   54%   48%   74%   41%   71%   50%   85%  54%   71%  48%   55%   53%   85%   50%   91%  70%   80%   58%   N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A   2015   IT/  Telecom   2012  IT/  Telecom   43%  43%  50%  86%  86%   38%  31%  46%  69%  62%   71%   79%  43%   46%   N/A  N/A   69%  50%  83%  90%  83%   76%   83%  67%   47%  50%  75%  86%  69%   78%   N/A  N/A   2015  Energy/  Utilities  38%  31%  54%  85%  77%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  29%  21%  21%  71%  50%   69%   77%  39%   36%   N/A  N/A      Review Annual Budgets  Review Roles & Responsibilities   Review Top-level Policies  Review Risk Reports  Review Security Incident & Breach  Reports  Review Security Program  Assessments  Review Incident Response Plans  Participated in Test Scenario  Against Response Plan             	     2012  Industrial   44%  56%  63%  81%  63%   44%   63%  31%   44%  25%  38%  50%  56%   50%   N/A  N/A   23	        48%#  53%#  Boards#With#Risk#Commi8ees#Separate#from#Audit#Commi8ees#  Board Committee Structure    Some of the biggest improvements over time have been organizational.
How a board is organized  and how it assigns committee responsibilities can significantly influence the effectiveness of its  management activities and security posture.
Traditionally, boards have not separated risk management  and audit responsibilities and established separate Risk and Audit Committees.
Regional Comparison Table:   Boards With Risk Committee       The financial sector far exceeds other industry sectors in having a board Risk Committee separate  from the Audit Committee, with 86% of boards in that sector having a separate Risk Committee.
Industry Comparison Table: Boards With Risk Committee     Boards  With Risk  Committee     2015  North   America  43%    2012  North  America   2012  Europe   2015   Europe   2015   Asia   60%#  50%#  40%#  30%#  20%#  10%#  0%#  2012  Asia    41%   73%   78%   8%#  2008#  35%   2010#  2012#  2015#  42%   14%#        Boards With Risk   Committee      2015  Energy/  Utilities  23%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  36%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   86%   78%   2015   IT/  Telecom   43%   2012  IT/  Telecom   31%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   38%   44%     The establishment of Risk Committees has led to the transfer of oversight of risk from Audit  Committees to Risk Committees.
24	        65%#  23%#  42%#  100%#  53%#  36%#  4%#  5%#  2008#  2010#  2012#  2015#  29%#  30%#  35%#  35%#  30%#  Risk#Commi3ee#  Audit#Commi3ee#  Full#Board#  90%#  80%#  70%#  60%#  50%#  40%#  30%#  20%#  10%#  0%#  Risk#Commi3ees#Overtake#Audit#Commi3ees#for#Risk#Management#  In 2008, only 4% of respondents  indicated their board had  assigned oversight of risk to a  Risk Committee.
In previous surveys, the  Audit Committee was the  dominant committee for risk  management.
Best practices and industry standards separate the audit and risk functions.
The reliance upon Audit  Committees to manage risk issues creates segregation of duties (SOD) issues at the board level since the  same committee that exercised oversight of operational aspects of privacy and security also conducted  audits in these areas.
Carnegie Mellon’s Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation Guide  provides step-by-step guidance on Risk Committee responsibilities for managing IT security risks.24    Asian boards are the frontrunners in assigning responsibility for risk to a Risk Committee, leading the way  at 48%.
Regional Comparison Table:       Most Responsibility for   Oversight of Risk         The financial sector leads all industry sectors, with 70% of their boards assigning the Risk  Committee the most responsibility for risk matters.
The  industrial sector, however, moved the responsibility for risk management to the full board, with 63% of  these respondents indicating these issues were mostly managed at the board level.
Industry Comparison Table:       Most Responsibility for   Oversight of Risk  Most Responsibility for   Oversight of Risk   Most  Responsibility for   Oversight of Risk  Risk Committee  Audit Committee  Full Board   2015  North   America  35%   33%  29%   2012  North  America   2015  Industrial   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   2012  Industrial   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   28%  36%  33%   23%  42%  33%   22%  41%  34%   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    48%  19%  33%   38%  14%  48%   2015  Energy/  Utilities  23%  38%  38%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  14%  43%  43%   2015   IT/  Telecom  33%  53%  13%   2012  IT/  Telecom  23%  54%  23%   Risk Committee  Audit Committee  Full Committee               	     70%  7%  20%   58%  11%  31%      19%  19%  63%   25%  25%  44%   25	        Risk/Security$CommiDees$Now$Common$  $  100%#  95%$  96%$  98%$  90%#  80%#  70%#  60%#  50%#  40%#  30%#  20%#  10%#  0%#  86%$  78%$  71%$  65%$  56%$  2015#  2012#  2010#  12%$  25%$  23%$  6%$  Audit$  Governance/Compliance$  Risk/Security$  IT/Telecom$  There is a clear trend of board Risk/Security  Committees surpassing IT/Technology  Committees in getting boards’ attention.
Industry Comparison Table:     Boards With Risk/Security &   IT/Technology Committees  2015  Boards With   Energy/  Risk/Security &   Utilities  IT/Tech Committees  46%  Risk/Security Committee  IT/Tech Committee  15%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  36%  14%   2015   IT/  Telecom   2012  IT/  Telecom   2012  North  America   2015  Industrial   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   58%  32%   98%  43%   44%  31%   63%  12%   86%  39%   64%  29%   46%  0%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    28%  16%   59%  22%   92%  31%   95%  38%   2012  Industrial     The  survey  respondents  from  2010-2015  indicated  a  clear  trend  in  Risk  and  IT/Technology  Committees hiring more outside expertise.
Risk Committees are hiring more outside expertise for risk management assistance in every  region, with Asia leading at 36%.
In Asia the use of outside expertise for risk management equaled that  of the Compensation Committee in both 2012 and 2015.
26	                  	     50%  54%  32%   45%  50%  55%   43%  43%  36%   67%  56%  33%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    2012  North  America   Boards Hiring Outside  Expertise   2015  North   America  68%   68%  86%   Full Board   Audit Committee  Compensation  Committee  Gov/Compliance/Ethics  Committee  Risk Committee  IT/Technology  Committee   Regional Comparison Table:       Boards Hiring Outside  Expertise                  Industry sectors also increased their usage of outside experts by Risk Committees, with dramatic  jumps in every sector except the financial sector, which already was the leader in this area and  remained so at 38%.
The use of outside experts by IT/Technology Committees in the industrial sector  increased from 0% to 40%; other sectors also increased in this area.
Industry Comparison Table:       Boards Hiring Outside Expertise     23%   32%  27%   25%   10%  15%   14%   36%  7%   22%   33%  22%   29%  85%  91%   50%   18%  3%   29%   26%  13%   2015  Energy/  Utilities  38%  75%  75%  38%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  50%  80%  90%  60%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   65%  47%  50%  26%   48%  61%  52%  22%   2015   IT/  Telecom   43%  57%  86%  43%   2012  IT/  Telecom   27%  73%  64%  36%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   50%  60%  80%  30%   25%  75%  83%  50%   Boards Hiring Outside  Expertise   Full Board   Audit Committee  Compensation Committee  Gov/Compliance/Ethics  Committee  Risk Committee  IT/Technology Committee   25%  13%   0%  10%   38%  18%   35%  13%   29%  14%   9%  0%   30%  40%   17%  0%     Fifty-nine percent (59%) of the respondents indicated that their board had an outside director with  risk expertise and 23% said they had a director with cybersecurity expertise.
Risk and security and IT experience ranked most valuable when  recruiting for board directors after financial and management experience.
Early surveys indicated  that boards favored traditional experience, such as financial, management, and legal backgrounds.
The  value boards are placing on directors having risk, security, or IT experience, however, has experienced  steady growth since the 2010 survey, with risk and security expertise valued more than IT.
27	        $Financial$   Legal$  0%#  64%$ 64%$  29%$  31%$  24%$   Academic$  14%$  36%$  27%$  26%$  30%$  33%$  40%$  37%$  48%$  51%$  $  Management$  17%$  15%$  20%$  2015$  2012$  2010$  87%$  93%$  95%$  87%$  95%$  92%$  50%#  60%#  70%#  80%#  90%#  100%#   Risk$and$Security$  10%#  20%#  30%#  40%#   Informa9on$Tech$   Government$Services$   Scien9?c/Engineering$  Importance$of$Exper9se$When$Recrui9ng$Directors$                                            Risk and security experience outranked IT experience in every region.
The respondents indicated  that North American and European boards valued risk and security expertise second only to  financial and management experience.
Asian respondents valued legal expertise slightly more than  risk and security.
Regional Comparison Table:       Expertise Very Important or  Important When Recruiting   Directors                    In 2015, the energy/utilities and financial sectors placed risk and security experience in a strong third  place for importance in experience when recruiting directors, immediately following financial and  management experience.
The IT/telecom and Industrial sectors placed a higher priority on other areas,  such as academic and scientific experience.
Expertise Very Important   or Important When   Recruiting  Financial  Management  Academic  IT  Risk and Security  Legal  Scientific  Government   2015  North   America  87%   87%  13%  46%  67%  24%  26%  9%   85%  85%  32%  27%  54%  58%  19%  31%   95%  86%  52%  48%  62%  81%  24%  33%   95%  95%  12%  42%  63%  37%  42%  9%   94%  97%  38%  22%  56%  41%  25%  9%   87%  87%  42%  42%  66%  34%  37%  16%   2012  North  America   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    28	                  	     Industry Comparison Table:       Expertise Very Important or  Important When Recruiting   Directors     Expertise Very Important   or Important When   Recruiting  Financial  Management  Academic  IT  Risk and Security  Legal  Scientific  Government   2015  Energy/  Utilities  100%  100%  31%  23%  85%  31%  54%  23%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  86%  79%  43%  7%  50%  21%  64%  14%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   2015   IT/  Telecom   2012  IT/  Telecom   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   86%  83%  29%  52%  76%  43%  2%  12%   100%  97%  33%  42%  75%  58%  11%  22%   86%  86%  57%  50%  43%  14%  43%  21%   92%  85%  31%  62%  69%  62%  54%  15%   94%  94%  27%  31%  50%  38%  56%  19%   94%  88%  25%  31%  50%  44%  0%  25%   29	          Internal Organizational Roles & Responsibilities    Boards and senior management are improving in establishing key positions for security and risk  officers, but lagging in establishing privacy positions.
Best practices call for clear roles and responsibilities  with respect to privacy and security, with dedicated full-time personnel leading each area.
The delegation of  privacy and security responsibilities should serve as a check and balance and protect the company against  segregation of duties (SOD) issues that can increase risk.
The various titles for personnel responsible for privacy and security were given four options on the survey:  chief privacy officer (CPO), chief information security officer (CISO), chief security officer (CSO), and chief  risk officer (CRO).
80%#  70%#  60%#  50%#  40%#  30%#  20%#  10%#  0%#  Companies$Improving$Security$&$Risk$Roles,$But$Lagging$on$Privacy$Roles# # 73%$  64%$  39%$  30%$  51%$  51%$  36%$  15%$  27%$  18%$  11%$  7%$  59%$  56%$  2015$  2012$  2010$  2008$  38%$  27%$  CISO$  CSO$  CPO$  CRO$  •  Only about one quarter (27%) of the respondents said they have a full-time CPO, up from 7% in   2008.
The management of privacy issues is concerning.
This  is not consistent with internationally accepted best practices and standards.
It is possible that some  respondents indicated that they did not have someone in a particular position because the person in their  organization did not have that specific title.
Any organization large enough to be included in the Forbes  Global 2000 list should have a dedicated CIO, CISO/CSO, CPO, and CRO.
North America and Europe are ahead of Asia in assigning key roles and responsibilities for  privacy and security, however both Asia and Europe substantially increased the percentage of  CPOs between the 2012 and 2015 surveys.
The IT/Telecom sector had the highest percentage of CPOs (64%), which was likely  due to requests for data from law enforcement and civil actions and other compliance requirements  associated with its industry.
Industry Comparison Table:  CISO, CSO, CPO, CRO   Companies with  Full-time Dedicated  Personnel for Role  CISO  CSO  CPO  CRO   2015  North   America  78%   52%  33%  61%   2012  North  America   52%  38%  5%  57%   82%  66%  29%  61%   58%  47%  23%  49%   72%  63%  3%  56%   46%  35%  23%  46%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    Companies with  Full-time Dedicated  Personnel for Role  CISO  CSO  CPO  CRO   2015  Energy/  Utilities  69%  46%  8%  38%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  50%  57%  7%  57%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   88%  62%  31%  100%   81%  67%  17%  89%   2015   IT/  Telecom   2012  IT/  Telecom   86%  79%  64%  57%   69%  79%  0%  54%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   63%  25%  13%  38%   50%  38%  13%  25%   90%#  80%#  70%#  Overlapping$Privacy$&$Security$Roles$Creates$SOD$Issues$    Organizations tend to overlap privacy and  security responsibilities, not  understanding the inherent SOD issues.
It  is important that privacy and security  responsibilities be separated to prevent a  single point of failure, which can occur (a)  when security personnel do not understand  compliance requirements or needed privacy  controls, or (b) when privacy personnel do not  understand the technical security  configuration or technical controls.25    The survey revealed serious SOD issues  between privacy and security roles.
More than half of the CISOs (51%) and a quarter of the CSOs (26%)   2015$  2012$  2010$  CISO$  CRO$  51%$  26%$  46%$  58%$  47%$  0%$  0%$  60%#  50%#  30%#  20%#  44%$  10%#  0%#  CSO$  CPO$  77%$  29%$  32%$  40%#  9%$            	     30	        indicated that they were responsible for both privacy and security.
Although this was down from 77% of  CISOs and 30% of CROs in 2010 with responsible for both privacy and security, it is a risk flag.
Since  2010, however, the surveys have indicated that CPOs rarely are assigned security responsibilities.
Privacy is much more compliance driven and few IT and security technical personnel are attorneys, so  saddling the CISO/CSO with privacy responsibilities invites a compliance issue or potential reputational  and financial harm to the company.
Clearly, the designation of privacy and security roles and  responsibilities is an area that requires more board attention.
In North America, respondents indicated that overlapping security and privacy roles  was on the decline, particularly with respect to CSO and CRO positions.
The same applied to Asia,  except respondents indicated 17% of CPOs had overlapping responsibilities for security.
In Europe,  unfortunately, there is a reverse trend, with more overlapping privacy and security responsibilities being  assigned to one role.
Regional Comparison Table:       Overlapping Privacy &   Security Responsibilities            Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities in a single security role occurs in all industry  sectors.
CISOs, CSO, and CROs have responsibility for both privacy and security at a much higher rate  than CPOs.
Energy/utilities and industrial sectors never assign security responsibilities, however, to a  CPO.
All industry sectors except IT/Telecom had more than half (51-60%) of CISOs saddled with both  privacy and security responsibilities.
Industry Comparison Table:  Overlapping Privacy &   Security Responsibilities     Role Has  Responsibility  For Privacy &  Security  CISO  CSO  CPO  CRO   2012  North  America   2015  North   America   42%   13%  0%  25%   58%  40%  18%  70%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    44%  35%  0%  48%   48%  40%  0%  22%   42%  22%  17%  33%   82%  62%  0%  67%   Role Has Responsibility  For Privacy & Security     CISO  CSO  CPO  CRO   2015  Energy/  Utilities  56%  33%  0%  0%   2012  Energy/  Utilities  43%  38%  0%  0%   2015  Finance   2012  Finance   51%  35%  8%  57%   76%  63%  0%  56%   2015   IT/  Telecom  33%  18%  11%  38%   2012  IT/  Telecom  78%  67%  0%  86%   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   60%  25%  0%  17%   25%  33%  0%  0%     There also are SOD issues in reporting lines when CISOs/CSOs report to chief information officers  (CIOs), because the CIO then controls the budget for the security program and may override security  configuration decisions or policies in favor of his/her own infrastructure architecture preferences, thereby  compromising security.
In addition, the CIO may interfere with security procurements by favoring certain  vendors or products without understanding the technological security differences between the products.
31	                  	     22%#  22%#  8%#  13%#  2015#  2012#   CEO/COO#  6%#  4%#  # CFO#  # CIO#  40%#  38%#   General#Counsel#  0%#  5%#  10%#  15%#  20%#  25%#  30%#  35%#  40%#  45%#  CISO/CSO#Repor=ng#to#CIO#Creates#SOD#Issues#  Although such reporting relationships  are against best practices, in 2015,  40% of the respondents indicated that  the CISO/CSO reported to the CIO in  their organization.
The surveys from 2010,  2012 and 2015 show little change in this  reporting structure, and independent  reporting lines likely will require board  action.
Regional Comparison Table:       CISO/CSO Reporting Structure               Likewise, CISO/CSO reporting to the CIO is on the rise in every industry sector except  energy/utilities.
The industrial  sector jumped from 25% of CISO/CSOs reporting to CIOs in 2012 to 47% in 2015.
Industry Comparison Table:       CISO/CSO Reporting Structure      CEO/COO  CFO  CIO  General Counsel   2015  North   America  15%   9%  51%  4%   5%  23%  44%     9%   2012  North  America   CISO/CSO  Reports to   33%  10%  33%  10%   19%  7%  26%  4%   13%  3%  50%  0%   57%  5%  19%  0%   2015   Europe   2012  Europe   2015   Asia   2012  Asia    2015  Finance   2012  Finance   2015   IT/  Telecom   2012  IT/  Telecom   2015  Industrial   2012  Industrial   2015  Energy/  Utilities  21%  21%  43%  7%   2012  Energy/  Utilities   7%  14%  50%  0%   CISO/CSO Reports to      CEO/COO  CFO  CIO  General Counsel                  	     29%  7%  29%  7%   54%  8%  15%  0%   30%  2%  47%  2%   28%  3%  42%  3%      6%  12%  47%  12%   19%  44%  25%  6%   32	        Organizations are showing significant gains in cross-organizational communication.
One of the most significant improvements from the results of the four Governance Surveys is in the  establishment of internal cross-organizational groups for communicating about privacy and security  issues.
•   •  •  •   In 2008, only 17% of the respondents indicated that their organizations had a cross- organizational team  In 2010, 65% of the organizations did;   In 2012, 72% of the respondents indicated that such a committee had been established, and   In 2015, 79% of the respondents had a cross-organizational committee or team.
The benefit of cross-organizational committees is realized across the globe; all geographic regions  indicated that 65% or more organizations had a cross-organizational team.
At least 81% of all industry  sectors have a cross-organizational team, except energy/utilities, which lags behind at 62%.
IT /   Telecom   North   America   Europe  Asia   Industrials   Financial   91%   76%   65%   86%   86%   81%   Organizations with cross-  Organizational committee       Energy /  Utilities  61%      •   •   CONCLUSIONS    The following conclusions can be drawn from the findings of the 2015 GTISC Governance Survey:     In 2015, the percentage of boards actively addressing and governing computer and information  security nearly doubled from previous surveys.
The 2015 survey revealed that nearly two-thirds  (63%) of boards are actively addressing and governing computer and information security,  whereas only about a third were in previous surveys (33% in 2012, 39% in 2010).
•  The 2015 report shows a significant shift in the number of boards reviewing cyber insurance,   indicating cyber risks are being considered as an enterprise risk.
Only about half of the respondents (47-54%) indicated they had quantified their business  interruption and loss exposure from cyber events.
•  Almost all boards are reviewing risk assessments and an increasing number of them are hiring   outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management.
•  There was a substantial increase in board attention to cyber risks when reviewing major supplier   relationships.
There was not much             	     33	        change, however, in boards considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major business  partnerships, acquisitions, or outsourcing relationships.
•  For the first time, the 2015 survey shows that more boards are regularly or occasionally engaging  in every area of governance best practices related to the governance of privacy and security.
The  weakest areas of oversight continue to be reviewing annual security budgets and assigning roles  and responsibilities for personnel responsible for these areas.
•  Sixty-three percent (63%) of respondents said their board regularly or occasionally reviewed   annual security program assessments.
•  Fifty-nine percent (59%) of the respondents indicated that their board had an outside director with   risk expertise and 23% said they had a director with cybersecurity expertise.
•  Risk and security and IT experience ranked most valuable when recruiting for board directors   after financial and management experience.
•  Boards and senior management are improving in establishing key positions for security and risk  officers, but lag in establishing privacy positions.
•  Organizations tend to overlap privacy and security responsibilities, not understanding the inherent  SOD issues.
More than half of the CISOs (51%) and a quarter of the CSOs (26%) indicated that  they are responsible for both privacy and security.
Although this is down from 77% of CISOs and  30% of CROs in 2010 with responsible for both privacy and security, it is a risk flag.
CPOs are  rarely assigned security responsibilities.
In 2015, 40% of the respondents indicated that the CISO/CSO reported to the CIO in their  organization.
The surveys  from 2010, 2012 and 2015 show little change in this reporting structure, and changes to require  independent reporting likely will require board action.
•  Organizations are showing significant gains in cross-organizational committees or teams, up from   17% in 2008 to 79% in 2015.
Regional Conclusions   •  North American (85%) and European (58%) boards are paying more attention to computer and  information security, up from 40% and 19%, respectively, in 2012.
•  The biggest jump in board attention to cyber insurance was in North America, where attention  doubled from 35% in 2012 to 70% in 2015.
•  All geographic regions had high board involvement in reviewing risk assessments (91-92%), but   the North American region relied more heavily (59%) on outside experts to help with risk  assessments and risk management.
•  Survey respondents indicated a 35% leap in the percentage of North American boards   considering cyber risks when reviewing potential major supplier relationships, putting it on par  with Europe (64-62%).
In following best practices for cyber governance, the survey results indicated that Asian boards  did best in reviewing annual budgets, roles and responsibilities, and top-level policies, but North  American boards excelled in reviewing risk reports, breach and incident reports, and security  program assessments.
•   •  The survey revealed that Asia was far ahead of North America and Europe in understanding the  importance of having a Risk Committee separate from the board Audit Committee, with 73% of  Asian respondents reporting their organization had a Risk Committee.
•  The value of risk and security experience for board service outranked IT experience in every  region.
The respondents indicated that North American and European boards valued risk and  security expertise second only to financial and management experience.
Asian respondents  valued legal expertise slightly more than risk and security.
•  North America and Europe are ahead of Asia in assigning key roles and responsibilities for   privacy and security.
•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities for a CISO/CSO tended to be on the decline in   North America and Asia, but on the increase in Europe.
•  All geographic regions indicated that 65% or more organizations have a cross-organizational   team.
Industry Sector Conclusions   The 2015 survey confirmed the 2012 report’s finding that, overall, the financial sector has better privacy  and security practices than other industry sectors.
The 2015 survey indicated significant improvements in  the energy/utilities and industrial sectors, which often had the lowest scores in the 2012 survey.
•  The 2015 survey revealed large increases in attention to cyber issues across industry sectors.
The industrial sector had the largest improvement in oversight of computer and information  security, with a 37% increase over 2012 (50% v. 13%).
•  Vendor management is receiving more attention in every sector, with the financial sector leading   on this issue.
•  The survey revealed a substantial increase in the percentage of industrial sector boards that are   reviewing risk assessments (100% in 2015, up from 63% in 2012).
The energy/utilities and  financial sectors rely on outside experts to help with risk assessments and risk management  (62%) more than other sectors.
•  The percentage of financial sector boards considering cyber risks when reviewing supplier   relationships shot up to 64% from 38% in 2012.
Similarly, board attention to cyber risks  associated with outsourcing agreements increased in every sector except IT/telecom.
•  The financial sector had the highest percentage of board involvement in every best practice area   except reviewing roles and responsibilities of key privacy and security personnel.
Across the  board, the respondents from every sector indicated significant improvements in board  governance of cybersecurity through increased activity in every best practice area.
•  The financial sector far exceeds other industry sectors in having a board Risk Committee   separate from the Audit Committee, with 86% of boards in that sector having a separate Risk  Committee.
The industrial  sector was lowest with 44% of boards having a Risk/Security Committee, and the energy/utilities  sector was only slightly ahead at 46%.
Industry sectors also increased their usage of outside experts by Risk Committees, with dramatic  jumps in every sector except the financial sector, which was already the leader in this area and  remains so at 38%.
•   36	               	        •  The energy/utilities and financial sectors place risk and security experience in a strong third place   when valuing experience in the recruitment of directors, immediately following financial and  management experience.
The IT/telecom and Industrial sectors placed a higher priority on other  areas, such as academic and scientific experience.
•  Overlapping privacy and security responsibilities in a single security role occurs in all industry   sectors.
Energy/utilities and industrial sectors never assign security responsibilities, however, to a  CPO.
All industry sectors except IT/Telecom have more than half (51-60%) of CISOs saddled  with both privacy and security responsibilities.
The IT/Telecom sector dropped from 78% of  CISOs with dual responsibilities in 2012 to a third (33%) in 2015, whereas the industrial sector  went the other way, jumping from only 25% of CISOs assigned dual responsibilities in 2012 to  60% in 2015.
•  CISO/CSO reporting to the CIO is on the rise in every industry sector except energy/utilities.
•  At least 81% of all industry sectors had a cross-organizational team, except energy/utilities, which   lagged behind at 62%.
Recommendations    The survey revealed that governance of enterprise security has moved considerably since the 2008,  2010, and 2012 surveys, but gaps remain in critical areas.
If boards and senior management take the  following 12 actions, they could significantly improve their organizations’ security posture and reduce risk:  1.
Establish a board Risk Committee separate from the Audit Committee and assign it responsibility  for enterprise risks, including IT risks.
Recruit board directors with cybersecurity, IT governance,  and risk management expertise.
Ensure that privacy and security roles within the organization are separated and that   responsibilities are appropriately assigned.
The CIO, CISO/CSO, and CPO should report  independently to senior management.
Evaluate the existing organizational structure and establish a cross-organizational team that is   required to meet at least monthly to coordinate and communicate on privacy and security issues.
This team should include senior management from human resources, public relations, legal, and  procurement, as well as the CFO, the CIO, CISO/CSO, CRO, the CPO, and business line  executives.
4.  Review existing top-level policies to ensure they set a “tone from the top” and create a culture of   cybersecurity and responsibility for systems and data.
Organizations can enhance their  reputation by valuing cybersecurity and the protection of privacy and emphasizing it as a  corporate value.
37	        5.  Review assessments of the organization’s cybersecurity program and ensure the program   comports with best practices and standards and includes incident response, breach notification,  business continuity/disaster recovery, and crisis communications plans.
Ensure that privacy and cybersecurity requirements for vendors (including law firms and cloud   and outsource providers) are based upon key aspects of the organization’s cybersecurity program  and includes annual audits and control requirements.
Carefully review vendor notification  procedures in the event of a breach or security incident.
Conduct an annual audit of the organization’s enterprise cybersecurity program, to be reviewed   by the Audit Committee.
Conduct a separate annual risk assessment of the cybersecurity program and effectiveness of   controls, to be reviewed by the board Risk Committee, and ensure that identified gaps or  weaknesses are addressed.
Require regular reports from senior management on the status of the cybersecurity program,   remediation activities, and recent incidents.
Require annual board review of the budget for the cybersecurity program and its linkage to cyber   risk management.
Evaluate cyber risks and potential business interruption and loss exposure costs and review   adequacy of cyber insurance coverage.
38	            	            	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	     Endnotes   1 Jody R. Westby & Julia Allen, Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation Guide, Carnegie Mellon  University, Software Engineering Institute, Technical Note CMU/SEI-2000-TN-020, 2007,  http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/07.reports/07tn020.html (hereinafter “Westby & Allen”).
3 International Organization for Standardization & International Electro technical Commission,  Governance of Information Security, ISO/IEC 27014 (2013), Section 3.2,  https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:27014:ed-1:v1:en (hereinafter “ISO/IEC 27014”).
5 See Jody R. Westby, Testimony Before the House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee  on Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental Relations and the Census, Sept. 22, 2004,  http://www.cccure.org/Documents/Governance/westby1.pdf .
For a discussion regarding the fiduciary  duty of boards and officers and the extension of that duty to protect the digital assets of their  organizations, see Jody R. Westby, ed., International Guide to Cyber Security, American Bar Assn.,  Privacy & Computer Crime Committee, 2004 at 189-93.
8 See, “Commission Guidance Regarding Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial  Reporting Under Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,” 17 CFR Part 241, June  27, 2007 at 4-5, https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33-8810.pdf.
9 “CF Disclosure Guidance: Topic 2, Cybersecurity,” Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of  Corporate Finance, Oct. 13, 2011, http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm.
11 “Cybersecurity Guidance, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of Investment  Management, April, 2015, http://www.sec.gov/investment/im-guidance-2015-02.pdf.
39	        	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	     12 FFIEC Cybersecurity Assessment Tool, “Overview for Chief Executive Officers and Boards of  Directors,” http://www.ffiec.gov/cyberassessmenttool.htm.
13 North American Electric Reliability Corporation, CIP Standards,  http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx .
14 Cybersecurity Framework, National Institute of Standards and Technology,  http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/.
15 Paul Ziabro and Joanne S. Lublin, “ISS’s View on Target Directors Is a Signal on Cybersecurity,” The  Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2014, http://www.wsj.com/articles/iss-calls-for-an-overhaul-of-target-board- after-data-breach-1401285278; see also Elizabeth A. Harris, “Advisory Group Opposes Re-election of  Most of Target’s Board,” The New York Times, May 28.
17 Kevin LaCroix, “Dismissal Granted in Cyber Breach-Related Derivative Suit Filed Against Wyndham  Officials, Oct. 21.
21 Proposal for a Council Framework Decision on attacks against information systems, Commission of the  European Communities, Article 9, Apr.
19, 2002, COM(2002) 173 final, 2002/0086 (CNS), http://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:52002PC0173; see also Proposal for a Directive of the  European Parliament and of the Council on attacks against information systems and repealing Council  Framework Decision 2005/222/JHA, Explanatory Memorandum, European Commission, COM(2010) 517,  http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/policies/crime/1_en_act_part1_v101.pdf.
40	        	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	     22 Email from John D. Dempsey to Jody R. Westby, Sept. 6, 2015, 11:42 a.m.  Disclosure: The author’s  firm, Global Cyber Risk LLC, is a strategic partner of Aon Global Risk Consulting, and the two companies  jointly offer a service evaluating cybersecurity programs and quantifying cyber risks.
23 See Internet World Stats, http://www.internetworldstats.com.
25 For a full discussion on the appropriate assignment of roles and responsibilities for all organizational  personnel and boards of directors, see Westby and Allen at 19-31, Appendix C.            	    THE DIGITAL AGE  THE DEFINITIVE CYBERSECURITY GUIDE  FOR DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS  NAVIGATING THE DIGITAL AGE: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide   for Directors and Offi cers  Published by     Navigating the Digital Age: The De?
nitive  Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and  Of?
cers  Publisher: Tim Dempsey  Editor: Matt Rosenquist  Design and Composition: Graphic World, Inc.  Printing and Binding: Transcontinental Printing  Navigating the Digital Age: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and Offi cers is published by: Caxton Business & Legal, Inc. 27 North Wacker Drive, Suite 601 Chicago, IL 60606 Phone: +1 312 361 0821 Email: tjd@caxtoninc.com  First published: 2015 ISBN: 978-0-9964982-0-3  Navigating the Digital Age: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and Offi cers © October 2015  Cover illustration by Tim Heraldo  Copyright in individual chapters rests with the authors.
DISCLAIMER  Navigating the Digital Age: The Defi nitive Cybersecurity Guide for Directors and Offi cers (the Guide) contains  summary information about legal and regulatory aspects of cybersecurity governance and is current as of  the date of its initial publication (October 2015).
Although the Guide may be revised and updated at some  time in the future, the publishers and authors do not have a duty to update the information contained in  the Guide, and will not be liable for any failure to update such information.
The publishers and authors  make no representation as to the completeness or accuracy of any information contained in the Guide.
Professional advice should always be sought before taking any action based on the  information provided.
Every effort has been made to ensure that the information in this guide is correct at  the time of publication.
It is your responsibility  to verify any information contained in the Guide before relying upon it.
SecurityRoundtable.org  Introduction New York Stock Exchange – Tom Farley, President  No issue today has created more concern within corporate  C-suites  and  boardrooms  than  cybersecurity  risk.
With  the  ability  to  shatter  a  company’s  reputation  with  their  customers and draw criticism from shareholders, lawsuits  from  affected  parties,  and  attention  from  the  media,  the  threat of cyber risk is ubiquitous and insidious.
No com- pany,  region,  or  industry  is  immune,  which  makes  the  responsibility to oversee, manage, and mitigate cyber risk  a top-down priority in every organization.
Today,  managing  cybersecurity risk has expanded far beyond the realm of  IT; it has become a business continuity necessity to ensure  shareholder  value  remains  intact  and  that  privacy  and  corporate intellectual property is protected.
Accordingly,  those  responsibilities  are  weighing  heavily  on  corporate  executives and directors, making it vital for them to better  understand  and  prepare  for  the  evolving  cybersecurity  landscape.
Cyber  risk  ultimately  poses  a  threat  to  confi dence,  a  foundational aspect of U.S. corporate issuers and markets.
We are taking a leadership role on many fronts, such as  reducing  market  fragmentation  and  complexity,  as  well  as  increasing  effi ciency  through  the  highest  levels  of  intelligence, analytics, and technology.
Confi dence in the  integrity and security of our assets is concurrent with our  success—as it is for every other company operating in the  public markets today.
Moreover,  because  the  public  markets  have  become  increasingly  reliant  on  interdependent  technology  sys- tems, the threat looms even larger.
It is important that companies remain vigilant, taking  steps to proactively and intelligently address cybersecurity   iii  ¦   INTRODUCTION  risk  within  their  organizations.
Beyond  the  technological solutions developed to defend  and  combat  breaches,  we  can  accomplish  even  more  through  better  training,  aware- ness,  and  insight  on  human  behavior.
Confi dence,  after  all,  is  not  a  measure  of  technological systems, but of the people who  are entrusted to manage them.
With   from   insights   the  preeminent  authorities  on  cybersecurity  today,  this  groundbreaking, practical guide to cyberse- curity has been developed to refl ect a body  of  knowledge  that  is  unsurpassed  on  this  topic.
Thank  you  for  your  continued  partnership  with the New York Stock Exchange, and we  look forward to continuing to support your  requirements in this dynamic landscape.
¦  iv   Foreword Visa Inc. – Charles W. Scharf, CEO  For  years,  cybersecurity  was  an  issue  that  consumers,  executive management, and boards of directors took for  granted.
The  technologists  worked  every  day  to  protect  their  systems  from  attack,  and  they  were  quite  effective for many years.
Cybersecurity is now something everyone needs to think  about, whether it’s in your personal or professional life.
What worked in the past is not enough to protect us in the  present and future.
First of all, the technology platforms of today are big- ger targets than ever given the breadth and criticality of  items they control.
And  fourth,  the  perpetrators  are  more  sophisticated, better organized, better funded, and harder  to bring to justice than ever before.
And that means that  having  an  outstanding  cybersecurity  program  also  can’t  detract  from  our  objectives  around  innovation,  speed, and performance.
Security has been a top priority at Visa for decades.
To  be  the  best  way  to  pay  and  be  paid,  we  must  be  the  most  secure way to pay and be paid.
Thus  we  must  guard  carefully  both  the  security  of  our  own network and company and the security of the broader  payments ecosystem.
v  ¦  FOREWORD  There  are  several  elements  that  we  have  found to be critical to ensuring an effective  security program at Visa.
Be open and honest about the effectiveness  of  your  security  program  and  regularly  share an honest assessment of your security  posture with the executive team and board.
We use a data-driven approach that scores  our  program  across  fi ve  categories:  risk  intelligence, malware prevention, vulner- ability  management,  identity  and  access  management, and detection and response.
The  capabilities  of  the  adversaries  are  growing,  and  you  need  a  dynamic  approach to measurement.
Invest   in  security  before   investing  elsewhere.
Active,  hands-on  engagement  by  the  executive  team and the board is required.
Your  involvement  will  produce  better  results  as  well  as  make  sure  the  whole  organization  understands  just  how  important the issue is.
At Visa, we must protect not only  our  own  network  but  the  whole  payments  ecosystem.
Tens of millions of consumer   ¦  vi   accounts had been compromised—a pivotal  moment for our industry.
The  losses  experienced  by  our  clients,  combined with the impact on consumer con- fi dence,  galvanized  our  industry  to  take  actions  that,  we  believe,  will  have  a  mean- ingful  and  lasting  effect  on  how  the  world  manages  sensitive  consumer  data—not  just  payments.
We are taking action as an ecosystem, to  collaborate  and  share  information  across  industries  and  with  law  enforcement  and  governments and to develop new technolo- gies that will allow us to prevent attacks and  respond to threats in the future.
Fraudsters  have  targeted  the  point-of- sale environment at leading U.S. retailers,  capturing consumer account information  and  forcing  the  reissuance  of  millions  of  payment  cards.
As  an  industry  we  are  rapidly  introducing  EMV  (Europay,  MasterCard,  and  Visa)  chip  payment  technology  in  the  United  States.
Chip- enabled  payment  cards  and  terminals  work  in  concert  to  generate  dynamic  data with each transaction, rendering the  transaction data useless to fraudsters.
Consumer  purchases online and with mobile devices  are growing at a signifi cant rate.
In order  to  prevent  cyberattacks  and  fraudulent  use of consumer accounts online, Visa and  the  global  payments  industry  adopted  a  new  payment  standard  for  online  payments.
The new standard replaces the  16-digit  account  number  with  a  digital  token  that  is  used  to  process  online  payments  without  exposing  consumer  account information.
Collaborate  and  share   information.
Sharing  threat  intelligence  is  a  necessity  rather  than  a  “nice  to  have,”  allowing  merchants,  fi nancial  institutions,  and  payment  networks  like  Visa  to  rapidly  detect  and  respond  to  cyberattacks.
Public  and  private  partnerships  are  also  critical  to  creating  the  most  robust   community  of  threat  intelligence,  so  we  also  work  closely  with  law  enforcement  and  governments.
At  the  heart  of  Visa’s  security strategy is the concept of “cyber  fusion,” which is centered on the principle  of  shared  intelligence—a  framework  to  collect, analyze, and leverage cyberthreat  intelligence,  internally  and  externally,  to  build  a  better  defense  for  the  whole  ecosystem.
Championing  security  is  one  of  Visa’s  six  strategic  goals.
Cybersecurity  needs  to  be  part  of  the  fabric  of  every  company  and  every  industry,  integrated  into  every  busi- ness  process  and  every  employee  action.
Palo Alto Networks Inc.  —  Mark McLaughlin, CEO  9   2.
THE THREE Ts OF THE CYBER ECONOMY  The Chertoff Group  —  Michael Chertoff, Executive Chairman  and Former United States Secretary of Homeland Security and Jim  Pfl aging, Principal  17   3.
CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES  Georgia Institute of Technology, Institute for Information  Security & Privacy  —  Jody R. Westby, Esq., Adjunct Professor  27   4.
INVESTORS’ PERSPECTIVES ON CYBER RISKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR BOARDS Institutional Shareholder Services Inc.  —  Patrick McGurn,  ISS Special Counsel and Martha Carter, ISS Global Head  of Research  33   5.
TOWARD CYBER RISKS MEASUREMENT  World Economic Forum  —  Elena Kvochko, co-author of  Towards the Quantifi cation of Cyber Threats report and Danil  Kerimi, Director, Center for Global Industries  37   6.
THE EVOLVING CYBERTHREAT AND AN ARCHITECTURE   FOR ADDRESSING IT Internet Security Alliance  —  Larry Clinton, CEO  43   7.
EFFECTIVE CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH  Former CIO of The United States Department  of Energy  —  Robert F. Brese  I. Cyber risk and the board of directors 51   8.
WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES: THE SEC’S   PUSH TO REGULATE PUBLIC COMPANIES’ CYBER DEFENSES  AND DISCLOSURES Fish & Richardson P.C.
A CYBERSECURITY ACTION PLAN FOR CORPORATE BOARDS  Internet Security Alliance and National Association  of Corporate Directors  —  Larry Clinton, CEO of ISA  and Ken Daly, President and CEO of NACD  71   11.
ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT  Stroz Friedberg LLC  —  Erin Nealy Cox, Executive Managing  Director  79   12.
DEMYSTIFYING CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AND REPORTING:   HOW BOARDS CAN TEST ASSUMPTIONS Dell SecureWorks  —  Mike Cote, CEO  II.
Cyber risk corporate structure 87   13.
THE CEO’S GUIDE TO DRIVING BETTER SECURITY BY ASKING THE RIGHT   QUESTIONS Palo Alto Networks Inc.  —  Davis Hake, Director  of Cybersecurity Strategy  91   14.
Cybersecurity legal and regulatory   considerations  101   15.
SECURING PRIVACY AND PROFIT IN THE ERA OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY   AND BIG DATA Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive  Vice President; Dean Forbes, Senior Associate, Agatha O'Malley,  Senior Associate, Jaqueline Cooney, Lead Associate and  Waiching Wong, Associate  107   16.
OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES  Data Risk Solutions: BuckleySandler LLP & Treliant Risk  Advisors LLC  —  Elizabeth McGinn, Partner; Rena Mears,  Managing Director; Stephen Ruckman, Senior Associate;  Tihomir Yankov, Associate; and Daniel Goldstein, Senior  Director    ix  ¦   TABLE OF CONTENTS  ¦  x   115   17.
RISKS OF DISPUTES AND REGULATORY INVESTIGATIONS RELATED   TO CYBERSECURITY MATTERS Baker & McKenzie  —  David Lashway, Partner; John Woods,  Partner; Nadia Banno, Counsel, Dispute Resolution; and  Brandon H. Graves, Associate  121   18.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE K&L Gates LLP  —  Roberta D. Anderson, Partner  129   19.
CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS   FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS Latham & Watkins LLP  —  Jennifer Archie, Partner  22. INTERNATIONAL INFLECTION POINT—COMPANIES, GOVERNMENTS,   AND RULES OF THE ROAD Kaye Scholer LLP  —  Adam Golodner, Partner  157   23.
MANAGING THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY USING THE SAFETY ACT  Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP  —  Brian Finch,  Partner  163   24.
COMBATING THE INSIDER THREAT: REDUCING SECURITY RISKS   FROM MALICIOUS AND NEGLIGENT EMPLOYEES Littler Mendelson P.C.
—  Philip L. Gordon, Esq., Co-Chair,  Privacy and Background Checks Practice Group  IV: Comprehensive approach to   cybersecurity  171   177   25.
DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY: THRIVE IN AN EVOLVING   THREAT ENVIRONMENT Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive  Vice President; Sedar LaBarre, Vice President; Matt Doan,  Senior Associate; and Denis Cosgrove, Senior Associate  26.
DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH   WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Bill Stewart, Executive Vice President;  Jason Escaravage, Vice President; and Christian Paredes,  Associate    TABLE OF CONTENTS  V. Design best practices 187   27.
A THREAT-BASED APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY   RISK MANAGEMENT Intercontinental Exchange & New York Stock  Exchange  —  Jerry Perullo, CISO  193   28.
BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION  Palo Alto Networks Inc.  VI.
Cybersecurity beyond your network 207   29.
MANAGING RISK ASSOCIATED WITH THIRD-PARTY OUTSOURCING Covington & Burling LLP  —  David N. Fagan, Partner;  Nigel L. Howard, Partner; Kurt Wimmer, Partner; Elizabeth H.  Canter, Associate; and Patrick Redmon, Summer Associate  219   31.
THE INTERNET OF THINGS  The Chertoff Group   —  Mark Weatherford, Principal  VII.
WORKING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT IN CYBER INVESTIGATIONS  U.S. Department of Justice  —  CCIPS Cybersecurity Unit  243   34.
DETECTION, ANALYSIS, AND UNDERSTANDING OF THREAT VECTORS Fidelis Cybersecurity  —  Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber Strategist  255   36.
FORENSIC REMEDIATION  Fidelis Cybersecurity  —  Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber Strategist  and Ryan Vela, Regional Director, Northeastern North America  Cybersecurity Services    xi  ¦   TABLE OF CONTENTS  ¦  xii   261   37.
LESSONS LEARNED—CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION  Rackspace Inc.  —  Brian Kelly, Chief Security Offi cer  267   38.
CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE  BakerHostetler  —  Theodore J. Kobus, Partner and Co-Leader,  Privacy and Data Protection; Craig A. Hoffman, Partner;  and F. Paul Pittman, Associate  275   39.
COMMUNICATING AFTER A CYBER INCIDENT  Sard Verbinnen & Co  —  Scott Lindlaw, Principal  VIII.
Cyber risk management   investment decisions  283   40.
OPTIMIZING INVESTMENT TO MINIMIZE CYBER EXPOSURE  Axio Global, LLC  —  Scott Kannry, CEO and David White,  Chief Knowledge Offi cer  289   41.
INVESTMENT IN CYBER INSURANCE  Lockton Companies Inc.  —  Ben Beeson, Senior Vice President,  Cybersecurity Practice  IX.
Cyber risk and workforce development 297   42.
CYBER EDUCATION: A JOB NEVER FINISHED  NYSE Governance Services  —  Adam Sodowick, President  301   43.
CYBERSECURITY READINESS THROUGH WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  Booz Allen Hamilton  —  Lori Zukin, Principal; Jamie Lopez,  Senior Associate; Erin Weiss Kaya, Lead Associate; and Andrew  Smallwood, Lead Associate  313   45.
Palo Alto Networks Inc. – Mark McLaughlin, CEO  Frequent headlines announcing the latest cyber breach of  a major company, government agency, or organization are  the norm today, begging the questions of why and will it  ever end?
The  reason  cybersecurity  is  ingrained  in  news  cycles,  and  receives  extraordinary  investments  and  focus  from  businesses  and  governments  around  the  world,  is  the  growing  realization  that  these  breaches  are  putting  our  very  digital  lifestyle  at  risk.
Or the expectation you have that  light, water, electricity, and other utility services will work  on command, despite your having little to no idea of how  the command actually results in the outcome.
3  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE  CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  ¦   Machine vs. human At the heart of the cybersecurity battle is a  math  problem.
One of the  negative  offshoots  of  the  ever-decreasing  cost  of  computing  power  is  the  ability  for  cyber  criminals  and  adversaries  to  launch  increasingly  numerous  and  sophisticated  attacks  at  lower  and  lower  costs.
Today,  bad actors without the capability to develop  their  own  tools  can  use  existing  malware  and  exploits  that  are  often  free  or  inex- pensive  to  obtain  online.
Similarly,  advanced  hackers,  criminal  organizations,  and  nation-states  are  able  to  use  these  widely available tools to launch successful  intrusions and obscure their identity.
In the face of this increasing onslaught in  the  sheer  number  of  attacks  and  levels  of  sophistication,  the  defender  is  generally  relying  on  decades-old  core  security  tech- nology,  often  cobbled  together  in  multiple  layers  of  point  products;  there  is  no  true  visibility  of  the  situation,  nor  are  the  point  products  designed  to  communicate  with  each other.
Unfortunately,  humans  facing  off  against machines have little to no leverage,  and  cyber  expertise  is  increasingly  hard  to  come by in the battle for talent.
Flipping the  cost curve on its head with automation and  a next-generation, natively integrated secu- rity platform is required if there is any hope  of reducing the “breach du jour” headlines.
In fact, we can also expect  that  the  “attack  surface”  and  potential  tar- gets  will  also  continue  to  grow  as  we  con- stantly  increase  the  connections  of  various  things to the Internet.
The  fundamental  problem  with this approach is that without signifi cant  prevention  no  combination  of  people,  pro- cess,  and  technology  can  prioritize  and  respond to every intrusion that could signifi - cantly impact a network and those who rely  on  it.
The attack math  Cost of launching a successsful attack  So,  the  strategy  must  be  to  signifi cantly  decrease  the  likelihood,  and  increase  the  cost,  required  for  an  attacker  to  perform  a  successful  attack.
It’s at  that  point  that  cyber  risks  will  be  real  and  persistent but that they will leave the head- lines and fade into the background of every- day  life,  commerce,  communications,  and  interaction.
The  result  was  panic  at  the  prospect  that  this  technology  provided  the  Soviets  with  an  overwhelming  advan- tage  to  deliver  a  nuclear  attack  across  the   Number of successsful attacks  U.S.
It appeared as though  there  was  an  insurmountable  technological  lead,  and  everywhere  people  turned  there  was anxiety and cascading bad news.
America relied on diplomacy and tradi- tional  forms  of  deterrence  while  devoting  technological  innovation  and  ingenuity  to  breakthroughs  such  as  NASA’s  Mercury  program.
We will know  we  are  in  good  shape  in  the  cyber  battle  when  we  have  reached  this  point.
Most  notably,  cyberthreats  are  not  the  sole  purview  of  superpower  nations,  and  the  technological  innovation most likely to reverse the cost of  successful  attacks  is  most  likely  to  come  from  industry,  not  governments.
However,  the principle is the same in that a prevention  philosophy is much more likely to result in  prevention capabilities being developed, uti- lized, and continually refi ned over time.
I think that most security  professionals and practitioners would agree  that total prevention is not possible.
So, the real question is  whether  prevention  is  possible  to  the  point  where the incidence of successful attacks is  reduced  to  something  manageable  from  a  risk perspective.
In order to achieve this outcome,   ¦  6   it  is  an  imperative  that  cost  leverage  is  gained in the cyber battle.
This leverage can  be attained by managing the cyber risk to an  organization through the continual improve- ment  and  coordination  of  several  key  ele- ments: technology, process and people, and  intelligence sharing.
Technology It is very apparent that traditional or legacy  security technology is failing at an alarming  rate.
The  fi rst  is  that  networks  have  been  built  up  over  a  long  period  of  time  and  often  are  very  complicated  in  nature,  consisting  of  security  technology  that  has  been  developed  and  deployed  in  a  point  product,  siloed  approach.
In  other  words, a security “solution” in traditional  network architecture of any size consists  of  multiple  point  products  from  many  different  vendors  all  designed  to  do  one  specifi c task, having no ability to inform  or  collaborate  with  other  products.
This  means  that  the  security  posture  of  the  network is only as “smart” overall as the  least smart device or offering.
Also, to the  extent that any of the thousands of daily  threats is successfully detected, protection  is highly manual in nature because there is  no capability to automatically coordinate  or communicate with other capabilities in  the network, let alone with other networks  not  in  your  organization.
Second, these multiple point solutions are  often  based  on  decades-old  technology,  like stateful inspection, which was useful  in the late 1990s but is totally incapable of  providing security capabilities for today’s  attack landscape.
And  third,  the  concept  of  a  “network”  has  morphed  continues  to  do  so  at  a  rapid  pace  into  something  amorphous  in  nature:  the  advent  of  software  as  a  service (SaaS) providers, cloud computing,   mobility, the Internet of Things, and other  macrotechnology  trends  that  have  the  impact  of  security  professionals  having  less and less control over data.
In  the  face  of  these  challenges,  it  is  critical  that  a  few  things  are  true  in  the  security  architecture of the future:   ?
First  is  that  advanced  security  systems  designed  on  defi nitive  knowledge  of  what  and  who  is  using  the  network  be  deployed.
Third  is  that  this  platform  must  also  be  part  of  a  larger,  global  ecosystem  that enables a constant and near-real-time  sharing of attack information that can be  used  to  immediately  apply  protections  preventing  other  organizations  in  the  ecosystem from falling victim to the same  or similar attacks.
Last  is  that  the  security  posture  is  consistent  regardless  of  where  data  resides  or  the  deployment  model  of  the  “network.”  For  example,  the  advanced  integrated  security  and  automated  outcomes must be the same whether the  network is on premise, in the cloud, or has  data stored off the network in third-party  applications.
Any  inconsistency  in  the  security is a vulnerability point as a general  matter.
And,  as  a  matter  of  productivity,  security should not be holding back high- productivity deployment scenarios based  on  the  cloud,  virtualization,  SDN,  NFV,  and other models of the future.
Process and people Technology  alone  is  not  going  to  solve  the  problem.
It is incumbent upon an executive  team  to  ensure  their  technical  experts  are  managing  cybersecurity  risk  to  the  organi- zation.
Most  of  today’s  top  executives  did  not attain their position due to technological  and cybersecurity profi ciency.
Given  the  current  threat  environment and the math behind success- ful attacks, leaders need to understand both  the  value  and  vulnerabilities  residing  on  their  networks  and  prioritize  prevention  and response efforts accordingly.
Under  executive  leadership,  it  is  also  very  important  that  there  is  continued  improvement  in  processes  used  to  manage  the  security  of  organizations.
These  attacks can be hard to spot in the absence of  proper training for individuals, and diffi cult  to control in the absence of good processes  and procedures regardless of how good the  technology is that is deployed to protect an  organization.
A  common  attack  on  organizations  to  defraud  large  amounts  of  money  via  wire  transfers counts on busy people being poor- ly  trained  and  implementing  spotty  pro- cesses.
In  such  an  attack,  the  attacker  uses  publicly  available  personal  information  gleaned  off  social  networking  sites  to  iden- tify  an  individual  who  has  the  authority  to  issue a wire transfer in a company.
Then the  attacker  uses  a  phishing  attack,  a  carefully  constructed  improper  email  address  that  looks  accurate  on  a  cursory  glance,  seem- ingly  from  this  person’s  manager  at  the  company  telling  the  person  to  send  a  wire  transfer right away to the following coordi- nates.
If the employee is not trained to look  for  proper  email  address  confi guration,  or  the company does not have a good process  in  place  to  validate  wire  transfer  requests,  like requiring two approvals, then this attack     7  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE  CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  often succeeds.
Intelligence sharing Given the increasing number and sophistica- tion of cyberattacks, it is diffi cult to imagine  that  any  one  company  or  organization  will  have  enough  threat  intelligence  at  any  one  time to be able to defeat the vast majority of  attacks.
However,  it  is  not  hard  to  imagine  that  if  multiple  organizations  were  sharing  what they are seeing from an attack perspec- tive with each other in close to real time, that  the  combined  intelligence  would  limit  suc- cessful  attacks  to  a  small  number  of  the  attempted  attacks.
This  is  the  outcome  we  should  strive  for,  as  getting  to  this  point  would  mean  that  the  attackers  would  need  to design and develop unique attacks every  single time they want to attack an organiza- tion, as opposed to today where they can use  variants of an attack again and again against  multiple  targets.
The  network  effect  of  defense  is  why  there is such a focus and attention on threat  intelligence  information  sharing.
It  is  early  days  on  this  front,  but  all  progress  is  good  progress, and, importantly, organizations are  now  using  automated  systems  to  share  threat intelligence.
At the same time, analyti- cal capabilities are being rapidly developed  to make use and sense of all the intelligence  in  ways  that  will  result  in  advanced  plat- forms  being  able  to  reprogram  prevention  capabilities  in  rapid  fashion  such  that  con- nected networks will be constantly updating  threat capabilities in an ever-increasing eco- system.
This  provides  immense  leverage  in  the cybersecurity battle.
However, if we take a longer  view of the threat and adopt a prevention- fi rst  mindset,  the  combination  of  next- generation  technology,  improvements  in  processes and training, and real-time shar- ing  of  threat  information  with  platforms  that can automatically reconfi gure the secu- rity posture, can vastly reduce the number  of successful attacks and restore the digital  trust we all require for our global economy.
¦  8   SecurityRoundtable.org  The three Ts of the cyber economy The Chertoff Group — Michael Chertoff, Executive  Chairman and Former United States Secretary  of Homeland Security, and Jim Pfl aging, Principal  Thanks to rapid advances in technology and thinking, over  the last decade we have seen entire industries and countries  reinvented in large part because of the power of the Internet  and related innovations.
Naturally, these developments cre- ated new opportunities and risks, and none is greater than  cybersecurity.
Today,  business  leaders,  academics,  small  business  owners,  and  school  kids  know  about  hackers,  phishing, identify theft, and even “bad actors.”  In  late  2014,  the  Sony  Pictures  Entertainment  breach  led to debates over data security, free speech, and corpo- rate management as well as the details of celebrity feuds  and paychecks.
The idea of cybersecurity is rising to the  fore of our collective consciousness.
Notable cybersecuri- ty breaches, including those at Target, Anthem BlueCross,  and the U.S. Offi ce of Personnel Management, have dem- onstrated that no organization or individual is immune to  cyberthreat.
In  short,  the  cybersecurity  environment  has  changed  dramatically  over  the  past  several  years,  and  many of us have struggled to keep up.
Many fi rms now  fi nd  themselves  in  an  environment  where  one  of  their  greatest business risks is cyber risk, a risk that has rapidly  risen from an afterthought to primary focus.
Answering that question requires an understanding of  the three Ts—technology, threat, and trust.
technologies   ¦  Technology Today we live in a golden age of innovation  driven  by  that  dominate  headlines—cloud  computing,  mobility,  big  data, social media, open source software, vir- tualization, and, most recently, the Internet of  Things.
These forces mandate that we redefi ne  what, how, and where we manage any busi- ness.
Others,  such as AT&T, have invested heavily in new   ¦  10   technology and are thriving.
Still, the advan- tage  lies  with  the  fi rms  who  not  only  embraced  the  Internet  but  also  built  their  entire business around it: Amazon, Google,  and  Uber.
Finally,  there  is  Apple,  which  came of age with the Internet and morphed  into  a  wildly  successful  global  leader  with  the introduction of the iPhone.
There  have  been  applications  for  these  technologies,  with  signifi cant  impact,  in  a  variety of industries.
In the electrical sector, smart  meters,  transformers,  and  switches  have  given utilities greater control over their distri- bution networks while their customers have  gained greater control of their consumption.
A  new  class  of  "bad  guys"  has  emerged  and  is  taking  advantage  of  "holes"  in  these  new  technologies  and  our  online  behavior  to  create  new  risks.
¦  Threat Lifecycle It is almost cliché to talk about the pervasive- ness and escalating impact of cybersecurity  attacks.
However,  it  is  useful  to  provide  a  map  that  can  help  us  better  understand  where we may be heading to help us prepare  and to develop more lasting defenses.
The  actors  also  can  be  grouped into four escalating stages: individu- als,  hacktivists,  cyber  organized  crime,  and  nation-states.
FIGURE  Nation- states  Cyber organized crime  R   O   T   C A     Hacktivist  HBGary  Individual  Embarrass    THE THREE TS OF THE CYBER ECONOMY     ??
Sony  Saudi Aramco  JPMorganChase  Target  Steal  customer  info  Disrupt  operations and destroy property  Destroy  business and future earnings  Widespread disruption  and destruction  INTENT  &  IMPACT  In 2011, a high-profi le attack was under- taken  by  Anonymous,  the  prominent  “hacktivist” collective, in which it attacked  the security services fi rm HBGary Federal.
The  attack  was  precipitated  by  HBGary’s  CEO,  Aaron  Barr,  claiming  in  a  Financial  Times  article  that  his  fi rm  had  uncovered  the  identities  of  Anonymous  leaders  and  planned  on  releasing  these  fi ndings  at  a  security conference in San Francisco the fol- lowing  week.1  Anonymous  responded  by  hacking into HBGary’s networks, eventually  posting  archives  of  company  executives’  emails on fi le-sharing websites, releasing a  list of the company’s customers, and taking  over the fi rm’s website.
For instance, the  Target  breach,  believed  to  have  been  the   work  of  criminals  operating  in  Eastern  Europe,  netted  40  million  credit  and  debit  card  numbers  and  70  million  customer  records and was largely responsible for the  company’s 46 percent drop in profi t in Q4 of  2013  when  compared  to  2012.2  The  attack  also resulted in a serious decline in the com- pany’s  stock  price  and  led  the  company’s  board  to  fi re  their  CEO.
Another  high-profi le  attack,  directed  against  Sony  Pictures  Entertainment,  is  alleged to have been the work of hackers sup- ported  by  the  government  of  North  Korea.
The  attackers  managed  to  secure  not  only  a  copy  of  The  Interview,  which  had  offended  and  motivated  the  North  Korean  state,  but  also  a  vast  trove  of  data  from  the  corporate  network,  including  the  personal  and  salary     11  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  details  of  tens  of  thousands  of  employees,  internal email traffi c, and other highly sensi- tive information.
Just a  few  years  ago,  many  viewed  cybersecurity  threats as a technical problem best left to the  company  CIO  or  CISO.
Increasingly,  CEOs  and  boards  are  coming  to  the  realization  cybersecurity threats are a business risk that  demands C-level and board scrutiny.
Corporate  boards  have  begun  to  look  at  cybersecurity  risk  in  much  the  same  way  they would look at other risks to their busi- ness,  applying  risk  management  frame- works  while  evaluating  the  likelihood  and  impact of cyber risk.
Boards also have begun  to look at ways to transfer their risk, leading  insurance  companies  to  offer  cybersecurity  insurance  products.
In  their  evaluation  of  cyber risk, companies are also taking a hard  look at the second order effects of a cyberat- tack,  notably  the  ability  for  a  successful  attack to undermine customers’ trust in the  company.
A successful attack often leads to  the revelation of sensitive, personally identi- fi able  information  on  customers,  eroding  consumer  confi dence  in  the  fi rm.
Many  of  the commonly understood risk management  frameworks and related insurance products  now being used recognize this and make it  clear that corporate boards must have a thor- ough understanding of the third T, Trust.
This  should  be  trou- bling  for  all  corporate  executives  and  gov- ernment leaders because trust is precious to  all  relationships  and  is  critical  to  effective  workings of commerce and government.
Measuring trust Recent  consumer  surveys  suggest  that  con- sumers are tired of dealing with fraudulent  charges and are raising their expectations for  how their favorite brands and websites pro- tect consumer data and personally identifi a- ble information.
In May 2015, Pew Research  released  a  study  in  which  74  percent  of  Americans  said  it  was  “very  important”  to  be  “in  control  of  who  can  get  info  about  you.”  Edelman,  one  of  the  world’s  largest  public relations fi rms, does an annual study  called The Trust Barometer.
The study revealed that  80  percent  of  consumers,  across  dozens  of  countries and industries, listed this as a top  issue in evaluating brands they trust.
Finally,  HyTrust, an emerging technology company,  published a study on the impact of a cyber  breach on customer loyalty and trust.
What these numbers make clear is that con- sumers  are  paying  attention  to  cybersecurity  issues  and  that  failure  to  address  these  con- cerns comes at a company’s own risk.
Role of industry Fortunately, industry is moving in this direc- tion,  and  many  companies  have  begun  to  consider  cyber  risk  in  their  corporate  plan- ning.
In  2014,  the  National  Association  of  Corporate  Directors  issued  a  call  to  action,  which  included  fi ve  steps  that  its  members  should take to ensure their enterprises prop- erly  address  cyber  risk.
These  include  the  following:   ?
Treating cyber risk as an enterprise risk  ?
Understanding  the  legal  implications  of   cyber risks   ?
Discussion  of  cyber  risk  at  board  meetings, giving cyber risk equal footing  with other risks   ?
Requiring  management   to  have  a   measureable cybersecurity plan   ?
The  development  of  a  plan  at  the  board  level  on  how  to  address  cyber  risks,  including which risks should be avoided,  accepted,  mitigated,  or  transferred  via  insurance.
Although this guidance is an excellent start,  we at The Chertoff Group believe that indus- try  has  to  go  further  and  move  toward  a  common cyber risk management framework  that  allows  everyone  to  understand  the  cyber risks to a business and how the com- pany  intends  to  address  them.
This  model  would be a corollary to the General Accepted  Accounting Principles (GAAP), the standard  accounting  guidelines  and  framework  that  underlies  the  fi nancials  and  planning  of  almost  any  business.
The  emergence  of  GAAP  in  the  1950s  made  it  signifi cantly  easier  for  investors,  regulators,  and  other  stakeholders  to  gain  a  clear  understanding  of a business and its fi nancials, allowing for  comparisons across industries and sectors.
In parallel, banks, insurers, and other pro- viders  of  risk  mitigation  are  scrambling  to     THE THREE TS OF THE CYBER ECONOMY     develop cyber risk mitigation products.
Many  of  the  insurance  industry’s  largest  players,  including  Allstate,  Travelers,  Marsh,  and  Tennant,  have  moved  to  offer  companies  cyber insurance products, although the imma- turity of the market has created complications  for insurers and potential customers.
Fortunately, time and the accompanying set- tling of industry standards and actuarial data  will help to mature and grow this market.
Role of government Effective  risk  management—for  govern- ments or private enterprises—starts with an  honest  understanding  of  the  situation  and  recognition  that  information  sharing  with  partners is essential.
Information sharing, of  course, starts with agreeing on common val- ues,  and  then  trusting  vetted,  capable,  and  reliable partners.
Information sharing can be,  and  must  be,  something  that  takes  place  at  and across all levels.
The Constitution charg- es the federal government with the responsi- bility  of  providing  for  the  defense  of  the  nation while protecting the privacy and civil  liberties  of  our  citizens,  a  diffi cult  balance  that  requires  trust  in  the  government  and  processes by which we reach that balance.
As we discuss the role of government in  information  sharing  and  building  trust,  we  have  to  acknowledge  the  impact  the  Snowden  revelations  have  had  on  public  trust  in  government.
Laws  such  as  the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, enacted  in 1986 and amended fi ve times since then,  and  the  Electronic  Controls  Privacy  Act  (ECPA),  which  dates  to  1986,  have  to  be  updated to refl ect the signifi cant changes in  technology and practice that have occurred  since they were envisioned.
Beyond these efforts, we need to establish  or reinforce agreed-upon rules and programs     13  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  for  government  data  collection  on  citizens  and  the  legal  frameworks  that  manage  the  transfer  of  that  data  between  governments  for  judicial  and  law  enforcement  purposes.
These  initiatives  have  to  lay  out  clearly  the  roles of all participants and, in our opinion,  reinforce and strengthen the role for NSA in  helping this nation deal with the adversaries  that  are  using  information  technology  to  harm us.
On the international front, in response to  mounting  concerns  over  data  privacy,  data  security  and  the  rise  of  online  surveillance,  governments  around  the  world  have  been  seeking  to  pass  new  data  protection  rules.
Several  governments,  including  Germany,  Indonesia,  and  Brazil,  have  considered  enacting “data localization” laws that would  require the storage, analysis, and processing  of  citizen  and  corporate  data  to  occur  only  within their borders.
Furthermore, requiring that data reside in a  server  based  in  Germany  instead  of  one  in  Ireland  will  do  little  to  prevent  spies  from  accessing  that  data  if  they  are  determined  and capable.
It is critical that  policymakers  and  technology  providers  work together to develop solutions that keep  online  services  available  to  all  who  rely  on  them.
We  must  develop  principles  that  can  serve as a framework for coordinated multi- lateral action between states and across the  public and private sectors.
First,  the  formation  of   ¦  14   Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centers  (ISACs) was a Clinton Administration initia- tive  to  build  PPPs  across  critical  infrastruc- ture  sectors.
The  Financial  Services  ISAC  has  truly  epito- mized  these  ideas  and  is  considered  by  many  to  be  the  leading  ISAC  in  sharing  threat information.
This model has been rep- licated in other industries and led President  Obama to call for an expansion of the infor- mation  sharing  model  to  smaller  groups  of  companies through Information Sharing and  Analysis  Organizations  (ISAOs).
Another  example  is  a  U.S.  government-industry  ini- tiative to combat botnets, in which the gov- ernment is working with the Industry Botnet  Group  to  identify  botnets  and  minimize  their impacts on personal computers.
¦  Technology, threat, and trust in the   boardroom  What do the three Ts of the cyber economy  mean  for  you?
Are we using technology for competitive   advantage?
Are we secure?
Do we  have  a  framework,  a  GAAP-equivalent  for  cyber  risk,  that  gives  me  the  tools  to  understand and measure risk?
Your response will have a big impact on the  future of your organization.
A  few  years  ago,  there  was  a  common  story  in  security  circles  about  two  types  of  companies: those who knew they had been  hacked and those who had been hacked but  did not know it.
Going forward, we will talk  about  companies  in  terms  of  who  cares  about  cybersecurity:  in  some  companies,  it  will be the entire executive suite; in others,  it  will  just  be  the  CISO  or  CIO.
Use the three Ts to help your organi- zation  manage  cyber  risk  and  leverage  the     THE THREE TS OF THE CYBER ECONOMY     fantastic opportunities in this golden age of  innovation.
Works Cited 1.
See  “Consumers   Increasingly  Hold  Companies  Responsible  for  Loss  of  Confi dential  Information,  HyTrust  Poll  Shows,” HyTrust, October 1, 2014, Available  at  http://www.hytrust.com/company/ n e w s / p re s s - re l e a s e s / c o n s u m e r s - increasingly-hold-companies-responsible- loss-confi dential-info,  Additional  survey  data  available  at  http://www.hytrust.
SecurityRoundtable.org     15  ¦  Cyber governance best practices Georgia Institute of Technology, Institute for Information  Security & Privacy – Jody R. Westby, Esq., Adjunct Professor  ¦   The evolution of cybersecurity governance Corporate governance has evolved as a means of protect- ing  investors  through  regulation,  disclosure,  and  best  practices.
The United Nations Guidance on Good Practices  in Corporate Governance Disclosure noted:  Where  there  is  a  local  code  on  corporate  governance,  enterprises  should  follow  a  “comply  or  explain”  rule  whereby  they  disclose  the  extent  to  which  they  fol- lowed  the  local  code’s  recommendations  and  explain  any deviations.
Where there is no local code on corpo- rate governance, companies should follow recognized  international good practices.1  The  Business  Roundtable  (BRT),  one  of  America’s  most  prominent business associations, has promoted the use of  best practices as a governance tool since it published its  fi rst Principles of Corporate Governance in 2002.
In its 2012  update, BRT noted:  Business Roundtable continues to believe, as we noted  in Principles of Corporate Governance (2005), that the  United  States  has  the  best  corporate  governance,  fi nancial  reporting  and  securities  markets  systems  in  the world.
These systems work because of the adop- tion  of  best  practices  by  public  companies  within  a  framework  of  laws  and  regulations  that  establish  minimum  requirements  while  affording  companies  the ability to develop individualized practices that are  appropriate  for  them.
Even  in  the  challenging  times  posed by the ongoing diffi cult economic environment,  corporations  have  continued  to  work  proactively  to  refi ne  their  governance  practices,  and  develop  new  practices,  as  conditions  change  and  “best  practices”  continue to evolve.2  17  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  Increases in cybercrime and attacks on corpo- rate systems and data have propelled discus- sions  regarding  governance  of  cyber  risks  and  what  exactly  boards  and  senior  execu- tives  should  be  doing  to  properly  manage  this new risk environment and protect corpo- rate assets.
The topic reached a crescendo in  May 2014 when the Institutional Shareholder  Service (ISS) called for seven of the ten Target  board  members  not  to  be  re-elected  on  the  grounds that the failure of the board’s audit  and corporate responsibility committees “to  ensure  appropriate  management  of  these  risks set the stage for the data breach, which  has resulted in signifi cant losses to the com- pany and its shareholders.”3  Over the past decade, the concept of cyber- security governance has evolved from infor- mation  technology  (IT)  governance  and  cybersecurity best practices.
The Information  Systems  Audit  and  Control  Association  (ISACA) has been a frontrunner in IT govern- ance best practices with the COBIT (Control  Objectives  for  Information  and  Related  Technology)4 framework.
ISACA founded the  IT  Governance  Institute  (ITGI)  in  1998  to  advance the governance and management of  enterprise IT.
It  is  an  integral  part  of  enterprise  governance and consists of the leadership  and  organisational  structures  and  pro- cesses that ensure that the organisation’s  IT sustains and extends the organisation’s  strategies and objectives.5  Gartner has a similar defi nition.6  ¦   Cybersecurity program standards and best   practices7  As  IT  systems  became  vulnerable  through  networking and Internet connectivity, secur- ing  these  systems  became  an  essential  ele- ment of IT governance.
The fi rst cybersecu- rity  standard  was  developed  by  the  British  Standards Institute in 1995 as BS 7799.
Over  time,  this  comprehensive  standard  proved  its  worth  and  ultimately  evolved  into  ISO   ¦  18   17799  and  then  ISO/IEC  27001.8  ISO/IEC  27001  is  the  most  accepted  cybersecurity  standard globally.
Today, the ISO/IEC 27000 series of infor- mation  security  standards  is  comprised  of  nearly  30  standards.
ISO,  of  which  the  American  National  Standards  Institute  (ANSI) is the member body representing U.S.  interests for the development of international  standards,  has  additional  information  secu- rity  standards  outside  of  the  27000  series.9  ISO  information  security  standards  cover  a  range of topics, such as security controls, risk  management,  the  protection  of  personally  identifi able  information  (PII)  in  clouds,  and  control  systems.
Additional  security  stand- ards  also  have  been  developed  for  fi nancial  services,  business  continuity,  network  secu- rity,  supplier  relationships,  digital  evidence,  and incident response.10  Improving  Critical   The  U.S.  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  has  developed  a  comprehensive  set  of  cybersecurity  guid- ance  and  Federal  Information  Processing  Standards  (FIPS),11  including  a  Framework  for  Infrastructure  Cybersecurity  (Framework).12  The  NIST  guidance  and  standards  are  world-class  materials  that  are  publicly  available  at  no  charge.
NIST  recognized  existing  standards  and  best  practices  by  mapping  the  Framework to ISO/IEC 27001 and COBIT.
Other  respected  cybersecurity  standards  have been developed for particular purpos- es, such as the protection of credit card data  and  electrical  grids.
The  good  news  is  that  cybersecurity  best  practices  and  standards  are  harmonized  and  requirements  can  be  mapped.
This  is  particularly  important  because as companies buy and sell operating  units  or  subsidiaries  or  merge,  they  may  have  IT  systems  and  documentation  based  upon  several  standards  or  best  practices.
Thus,  the  harmonization  of  standards  ena- bles companies to blend IT departments and  security programs and continue to measure  maturity.
Some companies may need to align with  multiple  standards.
For  example,  electric  transmission  and  distribution  companies     CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES     will  need  to  meet  the  North  American  Electric  Reliability  Corporation  Critical  Infrastructure Protection (NERC-CIP) stand- ards, as well as the Payment Card Industry  Data  Security  Standard  (PCI  DSS)  if  they  take  credit  cards,  and  some  other  broad  security program standard, such as ISO/IEC  27001 or NIST for their corporate operations.
Even  with  harmonization,  it  is  important  that companies choose at least one standard to  align their cybersecurity program with so pro- gress and security maturity can be measured.
In  determining  which  standard  to  use  as  a  corporate  guidepost,  organizations  should  consider the comprehensiveness of the stand- ard.
Although standards requirements may be  mapped, each standard does not contain the  same  or  equivalent  requirements.
Thus,  it  is   important  to  understand  the  breadth  and  reach of the standard and to choose one that  meets the organization’s security and compli- ance needs.
ISO/IEC  27001,  which  can  be  obtained  from ANSI at http://webstore.ansi.org, is a  comprehensive standard and a good choice  for  any  size  of  organization  because  it  is  respected  globally  and  is  the  one  most  commonly  mapped  against  other  stand- ards.
One should not make the mistake of  believing  that  all  standards  contain  a  full  set of requirements for an enterprise secu- rity program; they do not.
Some standards,  such as NERC-CIP or PCI, set forth security  requirements  for  a  particular  purpose  but  are not adequate for a full corporate secu- rity program.
Leading cybersecurity standards and best practices include:   ?
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the information security series,   http://www.iso.org/iso/home/search.htm?qt=information+security&published=on& active_tab=standards&sort_by=rel (also available from ANSI at http://www.ansi.org)  ?
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI)—the U.S. member body to ISO.
Copies of all ISO standards can be purchased from ANSI at http://webstore.ansi.org/   ?
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800 (SP-800)   series and Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), http://csrc.nist.gov/ publications/index.html   ?
Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL), http://www.itlibrary.org/.
International Society of Automation (ISA), https://www.isa.org/templates/two-  column.aspx?pageid=131422   ?
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA), the Control Objectives   for Information and Related Technology (COBIT), http://www.isaca.org/cobit/pages/ default.aspx   ?
Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI SSC), https://www.
Information Security Forum (ISF) Standard of Good Practice for Information Security,   https://www.securityforum.org/shop/p-71-173   ?
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations for security   programs, http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/combined/ index.html   ?
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Regulatory Guide 5.71, Cyber Security Programs   for Nuclear Facilities, https://scp.nrc.gov/slo/regguide571.pdf    19  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  Some  information  security  standards,  such as NERC-CIP, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory  cybersecurity  requirements,  PCI  standards  for  credit  card  data,  and  HIPAA  security  requirements  are  mandatory.
The remain- der of the standards listed are voluntary.
In  addition  to  the  leading  cybersecurity  standards listed in the shaded box, additional  standards  have  been  developed  for  certain  industry sectors because they require height- ened security protections.
For example, ISO/ IEC 27015 was developed as additional secu- rity  requirements  for  fi nancial  organizations;  ISO/IEC  27799  was  developed  for  informa- tion security in health systems using ISO/IEC  27002 (the controls portion of ISO/IEC 27001);  27011 was developed for telecommunications  systems  using  ISO/IEC  27002;  and  ISO/IEC  27019  was  developed  for  industrial  control  system security for the energy utility industry.
The value of using a standard as a guide- post for the development, maintenance, and  maturity of a security program is that it sets  forth best practices for cybersecurity and is  updated  as  required  to  meet  changing  threats,  technological  innovation,  and  com- pliance requirements.
Standards also enable  boards and senior executives to understand  how  comprehensive  their  organization’s  security program is and provide an objective  basis  for  audits  and  cybersecurity  assess- ments.
Evaluating  a  cybersecurity  program  against a leading standard enables an organ- ization to measure progress, assess the effec- tiveness of controls, identify gaps and defi - ciencies, and measure program maturity.
¦   Cyber governance standards and best practices Cyber  governance  standards  and  best  prac- tices  have  evolved  over  the  past  20  years  as  companies have increased connectivity to the  Internet  and  networks  and  as  cyberattacks  have continued to rise.
Directors and offi cers  (D&Os)  have  a  fi duciary  duty  to  protect  the  organization’s assets and the value of the cor- poration.
The  increased  dependence  on  IT  systems  and  data  in  corporate  operations   ¦  20   necessarily  extends  this  duty  to  include  the  protection of the organization’s digital assets  (data,  networks,  and  software).
As  a  conse- quence,  the  governance  of  cyber  risks  has  become  increasingly  important  for  boards  of  directors  and  senior  management.
This  includes  exercising  good  risk  management,  validating  the  effectiveness  of  controls,  and  ensuring compliance requirements are met.
An  increase  in  shareholder  derivative  suits  against  D&Os  for  failure  to  protect  against  breaches  also  has  heightened  atten- tion on cybersecurity at the board and senior  management level.
Target was hit with share- holder  derivative  suits  for  failure  to  protect  the company and its data from a breach,13 as  was Wyndham Hotels on similar grounds.14  In addition, cybersecurity has become an  important  compliance  issue  that  carries  the  risk  of  headlines  concerning  enforcement  actions,  investigations,  and  breaches  of  per- sonally identifi able information.
Several state  and federal laws impose privacy and securi- ty  requirements  on  targeted  industry  sec- tors  and  types  of  data.
For  example,  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), the Health  Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  (HIPAA), the Health Information Technology  for  Economic  and  Clinical  Health  Act  (HITECH Act), and state breach laws impose  specifi c requirements pertaining to the secu- rity and privacy of data and networks.
So,  what  does  cyber  governance  mean?
Cyber gov- ernance means more than D&Os periodically  asking  interesting  questions  or  receiving  reports regarding the company’s cybersecu- rity program.
There is now an international  standard, ISO/IEC 27014, on the governance  of information security, which sets out roles  and  responsibilities  for  executive  manage- ment and boards of directors and is applica- ble to all types and sizes of organizations.
The standard notes:   [G]overnance  of  information  security  provides  a  powerful  link  between  an  organization’s governing body, executive     CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES     management  and  those  responsible  for  implementing and operating an informa- tion security management system.
It pro- vides  the  mandate  essential  for  driving  information  security  initiatives  through- out the organization.15  The  objectives  of  the  standard  are  to  align  security  program  and  business  objectives  and strategies, deliver value to stakeholders  and the board, and ensure information risks  are adequately managed.16  The  difference  between  IT  governance  and information security governance is that  the  latter  is  focused  on  the  confi dentiality,  integrity,  and  availability  of  information,  whereas governance of IT is focused on the  resources required to acquire, process, store,  and  disseminate  information.17  ISO/IEC  27014 sets forth six principles as foundation  for information security governance:   1.
“Establish organization-wide information  security”:  information  security  activities  should encompass the entire organization  and  consider  the  business,  information  security, physical and logical security, and  other relevant issues.
an   information    3.
“Set the direction of investment decisions”:  establish  security  investment  strategy  that  meets  business  and  security  requirements;  integrate  security  considerations  into  existing  business and investment processes.
“Ensure  conformance  with  internal  and  external  requirements”:  ensure  policies  and  procedures  legal,  regulatory,  and  contractual  obligations;  routinely audit such compliance.
“Foster a security-positive environment”:  accommodate  human  behavior  and  the  needs  of  users;  promote  a  positive  information security environment through  training and tone from the top.
“Review  performance   in  relation  to  business  outcomes”:  ensure  the  security  program supports business requirements,  review impact of security on business as  well as controls.18  ISO/IEC 27014 sets forth separate roles and  responsibilities  for  the  board  and  executive  management within fi ve processes: Evaluate,  Direct, Monitor, Communicate, and Assure.
These are set forth in abbreviated form in the  following table.19  Board of directors  Executive management  Evaluate  Ensure business initiatives take information   Ensure information security supports   security into consideration  business objectives  Review reports on information security   performance, initiate prioritized actions  Submit new security projects with   signifi cant impact for board review  Direct  Establish risk thresholds of organization  Ensure security and business objectives are   aligned  Approve security strategy and overarching   Develop security strategy and overarching   policy  policy  Allocate adequate resources for security   Establish a positive culture of cybersecurity  program  Continued    21  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  Board of directors  Executive management  Monitor  Assess effectiveness of security program  Determine appropriate metrics for security   Ensure compliance and legal obligations   are met  program   Provide input to board on security  performance results, impacts on  organization  Evaluate changes to operations, legal   Keep board apprised of new developments   frameworks, and impact on information  security  affecting information security  Communicate  Report to investors/shareholders on   Inform board of security issues that require   whether information security is adequate  for business  their attention  Provide results of external audits or reviews   and identifi ed actions to executive team  Ensure board’s actions and decisions  regarding security are acted upon  Recognize compliance obligations, business   needs, and expectations for information  security  Assure  Order independent reviews/audits of   Support reviews/audits commissioned by   security program  board  ¦   Beyond ISO/IEC 27014: Other best practices   and guidance  At  present,  the  only  guidance  NIST  has  developed that addresses information secu- rity governance is its 2006 Special Publication  800-100,  Information  Security  Handbook:  A  Guide  for  Managers.
ISACA’s IT Governance Institute updated  its Board Briefi ng on IT Governance in 2014,20  which sets forth an approach similar to ISO/ IEC 27014, but is based on ISACA’s COBIT  best  practices.
The  Board  Briefi ng  includes  questions  board  members  should  ask  and  also checklists, tool kits, roles and responsi- bilities,  and  other  helpful  materials.
The  Board Briefi ng focuses on fi ve activity areas:  Strategic  Alignment,  Value  Delivery,  Risk  Management,  Resource  Management,  and  Performance Measurement.
The publication   ¦  22   is  IT-focused,  however,  and  does  not  men- tion  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  chief  information  security  offi cers  (CISOs).
The  separation  of  the  role  of  the  chief  informa- tion security offi cer from the chief informa- tion offi cer (CIO) (in other words, not having  the CISO report to the CIO), is a best practice  that the Board Briefi ng ignores.
It assigns all  responsibilities  to  the  CIO,  IT  Strategy  Committee,  IT  Steering  Committee,  IT  Architecture Review Board, and Technology  Council.
Nevertheless,  it  is  a  valuable  resource  for  boards  and  executive  teams  seeking  to  implement  good  cyber  govern- ance practices.
Finally,  Carnegie  Mellon  University’s  Software Engineering Institute developed the  Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation  Guide in 2007 as a guide for boards and execu- tives  on  governing  enterprise  security  pro- grams.21 It is still quite instructive and includes  a  model  organizational  structure  for  cyber   governance;  composition  of  a  cross- organizational  privacy/security  committee;  sample  mission,  goals,  and  objectives  for  a  board Risk Committee; and an explanation of  the critical activities in an enterprise security  program, including who should lead and be  involved in them, and the outputs (artifacts)  to be developed.
chief  security  offi cer/chief  information   security offi cer   ?
chief information offi cer  ?
business managers  ?
¦   Additional considerations in cybersecurity   governance  Board  structure  plays  a  signifi cant  role  in  cybersecurity  governance.
A  Risk  Committee  is the best choice for governance of cybersecu- rity  because  IT  risks  must  be  managed  as  enterprise risks and integrated into enterprise  risk management and planning.
Many compa- nies place all oversight for cybersecurity in the  board  Audit  Committee,  which  can  substan- tially increase the workload of that committee.
Placing  cyber  governance  with  the  Audit  Committee  also  creates  segregation  of  duties  issues  at  the  board  level  because  the  Audit  Committee  is  auditing  the  security  program,  determining  remediation  measures,  and  then  auditing this work the following year.
One  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  cybersecurity  governance  is  the  identifi ca- tion  of  vulnerabilities  that  could  have  a  material  impact  on  corporate  operations  and/or  bottom  line.
It  is  easy  for  board     CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES     members  to  become  inundated  in  technical  data  and  issues  and  lose  sight  of  the  major  risks  that  must  be  managed.
In  part,  CIOs  and CISOs need to develop better executive  and  board  communication  skills  when  reporting  on  cybersecurity  program  activi- ties and incidents.
Outside experts can also  help  separate  which  cybersecurity  govern- ance issues should be directed to the execu- tive  management  team  and  which  are  for  board consideration.
Once  the  critical  vulnerabilities  that  require board and executive attention have  been  identifi ed,  the  next  step  is  to  deter- mine the information fl ows that are needed  to keep the board and senior management  informed  and  enable  informed  decision- making.
These two steps—identifi cation of  cyber-related  vulnerabilities  and  associ- ated  information  flows—should  be  fol- lowed  by  an  analysis  of  the  board’s  and  senior  management’s  roles  in  incident  response and business continuity/disaster  recovery.
The  Target  breach  revealed  how  disas- trous it can be when a company’s executive  team and board are not prepared to manage  a  major  cybersecurity  incident.
Cybersecurity  governance  is  an  area  where an independent adviser can provide  valuable guidance to a board and executive  team  by  reviewing  available  reports  and  assessing  the  current  state  of  the  security  program,  identifying  key  vulnerabilities  and  associated  information  fl ows  that  should be directed to the board, advising on  the  threat  environment,  and  establishing  the  proper  organizational  structures  for  effective  cybersecurity  governance.
These  activities should be undertaken in a collab- orative fashion with IT and security leaders  and in the spirit of helping them gain visi- bility  and  support  for  security  program  initiatives.
23  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  ¦   Dutiful dozen There are some actions that boards can take  to  ensure  they  are  managing  cyber  risks  and meeting their fi duciary duty.
Following  is  a  list  of  a  dozen  actions  that  are  within  best practices, which can be used as a start- ing  point  and  checklist  for  governance  activities:  A dozen best practices for cyber governance   1.
Establish  a  governance  structure  with  a  board  Risk  Committee  and  a  cross- organizational internal team.
Identify  the  key  cyber  vulnerabilities  the  organization’s   associated  with  operations.
Identify  the  security  program  activities  over  which  boards  and  executives  should  exercise  oversight,  and  identify  the  key  information  fl ows  and  reports  that will inform board and executives on  the management of cyber vulnerabilities  and security program activities.
Set  the  tone  from  top  that  privacy  and  security  are  high  priorities  for  the  organization,  and  approve  top-level  policies on acceptable use of technology  and  compliance  with  privacy  and  security policies and procedures.
6.  Review the roles and the responsibilities  of  lead  privacy  and  security  personnel,  and ensure there is segregation of duties  between IT and security functions.
Ensure   that  privacy  and  security  responsibilities  are  shared,  enterprise  issues that apply to all personnel.
9.  Review and approve annual budgets for   security programs.
10.  Review  annual  risk  assessments,  the  maturity  of  the  security  program,  and  support continual improvement.
Retain a trusted adviser to independently  inform  the  board  on  changes  in  the  threat  environment,  provide  assistance  on  governance  issues,  and  advise  on  response  issues  in  the  event  of  a  major  cyber incident.
Evaluate   the  adequacy  of  cyber  insurance  against  loss  valuations  and  ensure  adequate  risk  strategies  are  in  place for cyber risks.
Many  organizations  also  are  struggling  with  how  to  integrate  cybersecurity  into  their  enterprise  risk  management  process.
Following are another dozen guiding  points on integrating cyber risks into enter- prise risk management.
:  A dozen best practices for integrating cybersecurity into  enterprise risk management   1.
Map  legal  requirements  to  data  for  all   jurisdictions.
Evaluate the security of vendors, business   partners, and supply chain linkages.
Align  the  cybersecurity  program  with   best practices and standards.
Ensure  controls  are  determined  and   metrics identifi ed.
Conduct a risk assessment to establish a   baseline for cyber risk management.
Develop  cyber  risk  strategies  (block  the  risk, cyber insurance, other compensating  controls, all of these).
Make  cyber   training  and  security  compliance part of annual performance  reviews for all personnel.
Stay abreast of innovation and changes  in  the  threat  environment  as  well  as  changing operational requirements.
Design   system   architecture   to  accommodate  business  goals  and  objectives,  meet  security  and  legal  requirements,  and  detect  or  prevent  unauthorized usage.
¦   Conclusion Best  practices  and  standards  now  require  boards  and  senior  management  to  exercise  governance over cybersecurity programs and  associated risks.
Laws such as Gramm-Leach- Bliley,  the  Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act,  and  the  Federal  Information  Security  Management  Act  all  require  executive  oversight  of  security  pro- grams.
Each organization’s operations, system  architecture,  policies  and  procedures,  and  culture vary, thus, cyber risk management has  to  be  tailored  to  the  organization.
Boards  should  know  what  standards/best  practices  their organization is using to implement their  security program and determine an approach  for their own governance activities.
Checklists  and  the  use  of  ISO/IEC  27014,  the  ISACA  Board  Briefi ng  on  IT  Governance,  and  the  Carnegie  Mellon  University’s  Governing  for  Enterprise Security Implementation Guide are all  useful resources that will help ensure boards  are meeting their fi duciary duty and protect- ing the assets of the organization.
Guidance  on  Good  Practices  in  Corporate  Governance  Disclosure,  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD),  New  York  &  Geneva,  2006,  http://unctad.org/en/docs/iteteb20063_ en.pdf.
Elizabeth  A.  Harris,  “Advisory  Group  Opposes Re-election of Most of Target’s  Board,”  The  New  York  Times,  May  28,  2014,  http://www.nytimes.com/ 2014/05/29/business/advisory-group- opposes-re-election-of-most-of-targets- board.html?_r=0 (quoting ISS report).
COBIT  is  an  acronym  for  Control  Objectives  for  Information  and  Related  Technology.
Information  on  the  COBIT  5  framework  for  the  governance  and     CYBER GOVERNANCE BEST PRACTICES     management of enterprise IT is available  at  http://www.isaca.org/cobit/pages/ default.aspx.
The  term  “cybersecurity  best  practice”  may  be  used  interchangeably  with  “standard” in the cybersecurity context,  as the standards embody best practices.
The term “standard” is commonly used  to  refer  to  mandatory  requirements.
With respect to cybersecurity programs,  however, there is no bright line between  best  practices  and  standards.
Some  standards,  such  as  NERC-CIP  and  HIPAA,  are  mandatory  for  certain  organizations,  while  other  standards,  such  as  ISO/IEC,  are  voluntary.
Other  standards,  such  as  the  Federal  Information Processing Standards (FIPS)  and  NIST  guidance  (the  800  Special  Publication  series)  are  voluntary  for  some entities and mandatory for others.
9.  International   Organization   for  Standardization,  Information  Security,  http://www.iso.org/iso/home/search.
National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology, Computer Security Division,  Computer  Security  Resource  Center,  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ PubsSPs.html.
Framework   for   Improving  Critical  Infrastructure  Cybersecurity,  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  Version 1.0, Feb. 12, 2014, http://www.
ISO/IEC  27014  (2013),  Governance  of  Information  Security,  “Summary,”  http://www.iso.org/iso/home/search.
“Processes.”  The   full  requirements  of  the  standard  should  be  reviewed prior to use by an organization;  ISO 27014 is available at http://www.iso.
Jody R. Westby & Julia H. Allen, Governing  Implementation  Guide,  for  Enterprise  Carnegie  Mellon  University,  Software  Engineering  Institute,  2007,  http:// globalcyberrisk.com/wp-content/ uploads/2012/08/Governing-for- Enterprise-Sec-Impl-Guide.pdf.
¦  26   SecurityRoundtable.org  Investors’ perspectives on cyber  risks: Implications for boards Institutional Shareholder Services Inc. – Patrick McGurn,  ISS Special Counsel and Martha Carter,  ISS Global Head of Research  Although  pundits  proclaimed  2014  as  the  “Year  of  the  Data  Breach”  and  a  signifi cant  “no”  vote  at  Target’s  annual meeting put directors on notice that sharehold- ers want to know about potential risks, few 2015 corpo- rate disclosure documents provide evidence that boards  increased transparency with respect to cyber oversight.
Despite  prodding  from  top  regulators  and  investors’  calls for greater transparency, companies continue to fall  short  on  disclosure  in  their  key  governance  disclosure  documents of cybersecurity risks and their board’s over- sight  of  them.
Equally  concerning  is  the  limited  infor- mation  regarding  cyber  risk  oversight  provided  by  boards  at  a  handful  of  fi rms  that  were  the  targets  of  2014’s most widely publicized breaches.
Boards would  benefi t  from  an  understanding  of  investors’  perspec- tives  and  adoption  of  best  practices  in  disclosure  on  cyber risks.
As  part  of  its  research  process  leading  up  to  the  annual  meeting,  (ISS)  engaged  with  members  of  the  Target  board  to  learn  more about the directors’ oversight of cyber risks before  and after the breach.
ISS acknowledged  the  board’s  actions  in  the  wake  of  the  breach  but  found  that  the  committees  “failed  to  appropriately  implement  a  risk  assessment structure that could have better  prepared the company for a data breach.”  After  investors’  concerns  emerged  before  the meeting, the company engaged in a solic- itation  effort  to  defend  the  board’s  response  to  the  breach.
In a June 10, 2014, speech (“Boards of  Directors, Corporate Governance and Cyber  Risks: Sharpening the Focus”) delivered at  a New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)–hosted  cybersecurity  conference,  Aguilar  said,  “[B]oard  oversight  of  cyber-risk  manage- ment is critical to ensuring that companies  are  taking  adequate  steps  to  prevent,  and  prepare for, the harms that can result from  such  attacks.
There  is  no  substitution  for  proper  preparation,  deliberation,  and  engagement  on  cybersecurity  issues.”  Noting  the  wide  damage  crater  caused  by  cyber events, Aguilar noted that the board- room  plan  should  include  “whether,  and  how,  the  cyber-attack  will  need  to  be  dis- closed  internally  and  externally  (both  to  customers and to investors).”  ¦  Shareholders care about breaches Are  shareholders  apathetic  about  data  breaches?
Some  media  reports  equate  the   ¦  28   lack  of  sharp,  downward  stock  movements  in the wake of disclosures of hacks or other  data breaches (or quick rebounds from such  price  drops  when  they  occur)  with  share- holders’  apathy  over  cybersecurity  prob- lems.
In  a  recent  Harvard  Business  Review  article  (Why  Data  Breaches  Don’t  Hurt  Stock  Prices, March 31, 2015), cybersecurity strate- gist  Elena  Kvochko  and  New  York  Times  Chief Technology Offi cer Rajiv Pant dismiss  this easy explanation.
They argue that muted  stock price reactions to data breaches refl ect  the absence of timely information and qual- ity  tools  to  price  cyber  risk:  “Shareholders  still  don’t  have  good  metrics,  tools,  and  approaches  to  measure  the  impact  of  cyber  attacks on businesses and translate that into  a  dollar  value  .
The  long  and  mid-term  effects  of  lost  intellectual  property,  disclo- sure of sensitive data, and loss of customer  confi dence  may  result  in  loss  of  market  share, but these effects are diffi cult to quan- tify.”  Faced  with  this  information  vacuum,  Kvochko  and  Pant  note  that  “shareholders  only react to breach news when it has direct  impact  on  business  operations,  such  as  litigation charges (for example, in the case of  Target) or results in immediate changes to a  company’s expected profi tability.”  Indeed,  stock  prices  may  not  tell  the  whole  story.
A  recent  survey— conducted  by  FTI  Consulting  on  behalf  of  consulting giant KPMG LLP—of more than  130  global  institutional  investors  with  an  estimated  $3  trillion  under  management  found  that  cyber  events  may  affect  inves- tors’  confi dence  in  the  board  and  demand  for the affected companies’ shares.
Investors  opined  that  less  than  half  of  boards of the companies that they currently  invest  in  have  adequate  skills  to  manage  rising  cyberthreats.
They  also  believe  that  43  percent  of  board  members  have  “unac- ceptable  skills  and  knowledge  to  manage  innovation  and  risk  in  the  digital  world.”     INVESTORS’ PERSPECTIVES ON CYBER RISKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR BOARDS    More  ominously  for  boards,  four  of  fi ve  investor respondents (79 percent) suggest- ed that they may blacklist stocks of hacked  fi rms.
As  for  a  remedy,  86  percent  of  the  surveyed  investors  told  KPMG  and  FTI  that they want to see increases in the time  boards spend on addressing cyber risk.
¦  Investors raise the bar for disclosure Insights  on  the  gap  between  investors’  expectations and boardroom practices were  gleaned  from  PwC’s  juxtaposition  of  two  surveys that it conducted in the summer of  2014,  one  of  863  directors  in  PwC’s  2014  Annual  Corporate  Directors  Survey,  and  the  other  of  institutional  investors  with  more  than  $11  trillion  in  aggregate  assets  under  management in PwC’s 2014 Investor Survey.
Nearly  three  quarters  (74  percent)  of  investors  told  PwC  that  they  believe  it  is  important  for  directors  to  discuss  their  company’s  crisis  response  plan  in  the  event  of  a  major  security  breach.
Roughly  three  out  of  four  (74  percent)  investors  urged  boards  to  boost  cyber  risk  disclosures  in  response  to  the  SEC’s  guidance, but only 38 percent of directors  reported discussing the topic.
Similarly, 68 percent of investors believe it is  important for directors to discuss engaging  an  outside  cybersecurity  expert,  but  only  42 percent of directors had done so.
Fifty-fi ve  percent  of  investors  said  it  was  important  for  boards  to  consider  designating  a  chief  information  security  offi cer,  their  companies  did  not  have  one  in  place.
Finally,  45  percent  of  investors  believe  it  is  important  for  directors  to  discuss  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)/  Department  of  Homeland  Security  cybersecurity  framework, but only 21 percent of directors  reported their boards had done so.
In  2014,  as  part  of  ISS’  2015  policy-formulation  process,  we  asked  institutional  investors  to  weigh  the  factors  they  assess  in  reviewing  boardroom  over- sight  of  risk,  including  cyberthreats.
changes in senior management.
An  eye-popping  85  percent  of  the  respondents  cited  such  crisis  management  and “lessons learned” disclosures as “very  important.”  In  contrast,  only  46  percent  of  the  shareholders  indicated  that  changes  in  senior management are “very important” to  them when it came time to vote on director  oversight.
In sharp contrast to the absence of infor- mation  in  Target’s  2014  proxy  statement,     29  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  however, another big box retailer provided  investors  with  a  window  into  the  board’s  role  in  cyber  risk  oversight  in  its  2015  proxy materials.
The proxy statement disclosures include a  brief summary of the depth and duration of  the  breach,  an  explanation  of  the  board’s  delegation of oversight responsibility to the  audit committee, and an outline of remedial  steps that the board took in response to the  event.
Notably,  Home  Depot’s  disclosures  gen- erally align with all the pillars identifi ed by  investors in their responses to the ISS policy  survey:  First,  Home  Depot’s  board  details  the  delegation of risk oversight to the audit com- mittee and describes the directors’ relation- ship with the company’s internal audit and  compliance team:  .
has  primary  responsibility for overseeing risks related  to  information  technology  and  data  pri- vacy  and  security.
The chair of the ERC, who  is  also  our  Vice  President  of  Internal  Audit and Corporate Compliance, reports  the ERC’s risk analyses to senior manage- ment  regularly  and  attends  each  Audit  Committee meeting.
The chair of the ERC  also  provides  a  detailed  annual  report  regarding the Company’s risk assessment   ¦  30   and  management  process  to  the  full  Board.”  Next,  the  Home  Depot  disclosure  provides  some  color  on  the  board’s  risk  oversight  policies and procedures:  For a number of years, IT and data secu- rity risks have been included in the risks  reviewed on a quarterly basis by the ERC  and  the  Audit  Committee  and  in  the  annual report to the Board on risk assess- ment  and  management.
In  the  last  few  years,  the  Audit  Committee  and/or  the  full  Board  have  also  regularly  received  detailed  reports  on  IT  and  data  security  matters  from  senior  members  of  our  IT  and  internal  audit  departments.
These  reports  were  given  at  every  quarterly  Audit  Committee  meeting  in  fi scal  2014,  including  an  additional  half-day  Audit  Committee session devoted exclusively to  these  matters  that  was  held  prior  to  the  discovery of the Data Breach.
The topics  covered  by  these  reports  included  risk  management  strategies,  consumer  data  security, the Company’s ongoing risk mit- igation activities, and cyber security strat- egy and governance structure.
To  further  support  our  IT  and  data  security  efforts,  in  2013  the  Company  enhanced  and  expanded  the  Incident  Response  Team  (“IRT”)  formed  several  years  earlier.
The  IRT  is  charged  with  developing action plans for and respond- ing rapidly to data security situations.
The  Home  Depot  board  also  highlights  its  cyber-risk  oversight  actions  prior  to  the  incident:  the  Board’s  and   Under  the  Audit  Committee’s  leadership  and  oversight,  the Company had taken signifi cant steps     INVESTORS’ PERSPECTIVES ON CYBER RISKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR BOARDS    to  address  evolving  privacy  and  cyber  security risks before we became aware of  the Data Breach:   ?
Prior  to  the  Data  Breach  and  in  part  in  reaction  to  breaches  experienced  by  other  companies,  we  augmented  our  existing  security  activities  by  launching  a  multi-work  stream  effort  to  review  and  further  harden  our  IT  and  data  security  processes  and  systems.
This effort included working  extensively  with  third-party  experts  and  security  fi rms  and  has  been  subsequently  modifi ed  and  enhanced  based on our learnings from the Data  Breach experience.
In  January  2014,  as  part  of  the  efforts  described  above,  we  began  a  major  payment  security  project  to  provide  enhanced encryption of payment card  data at the point of sale in all of our U.S.  stores.
The new security protection  takes  raw  payment  card  information  and scrambles it to make it unreadable  to unauthorized users.
We are rolling out EMV “chip-and-PIN”  technology  in  our  U.S.  stores,  which  adds  extra  layers  of  payment  card  protection for customers who use EMV  chip-and-PIN enabled cards.
Finally, the Home Depot board discusses the  boardroom  oversight  actions  taken  subse- quent  to  the  incident  including  changes  in  senior management:  Following  discovery  of  the  Data  Breach,  in  addition  to  continuing  the  efforts  described  above,  the  Company  and  the  Board  took  a  number  of  additional  actions:   ?
We  formed  an   internal  executive  committee,  the  Data  Security  and   Privacy  Governance  Committee,  to  provide  further  enterprise-wide  oversight  and  governance  over  data  security.
We  are  in  the  process  of  further  augmenting  our  IT  security  team,  including  by  adding  an  offi cer  level  Chief Information Security Offi cer and  hiring additional associates focused on  IT and data security.
We  are  reviewing  and  enhancing  all  of our training relating to privacy and  data security, and we intend to provide  additional  annual  data  security  training for all of our associates before  the end of Fiscal 2015.   ?
In  addition  to  the  IT  and data security initiatives described  above,  the  Board,  supported  by  the  work  of  its  Audit  and  Finance  Committees,  has  reviewed  and  authorized the expenditures associated  with  a  series  of  capital  intensive  projects  designed  to  further  harden  our  IT  security  environment  against  evolving data security threats.
The signifi cant “no” vote against  the Target board at its 2014 annual meeting,  coupled with survey data, show that share- holders are far from apathetic when it comes  to assessing cyber risk oversight.
In light of this feedback and  with the assistance of a third-party strategy  and  risk  management  and  regulatory  com- pliance consultant, the board “embarked on  a  comprehensive  review”  of  risk  oversight  at  the  management,  board,  and  committee  levels.
As  a  result  of  this  comprehensive  review,  in  January  2015,  the  Target  board  “clarifi ed and enhanced” its practices to pro- vide  more  transparency  about  how  risk  oversight is exercised at the board and com- mittee  levels.
Boards  would  be  wise  to  raise  their  games  by  disclosing  more  details  of  their  board  oversight  efforts  and  engaging  with  inves- tors when cyber incidents occur, or they may  run the risk of a loss of investor confi dence.
¦  32   SecurityRoundtable.org  Toward cyber risks measurement Elena Kvochko, Author, Towards the Quantifi cation  of Cyber Threats report; and Danil Kerimi, Director,  Center for Global Industries, World Economic Forum  As most companies in the U.S. already use some form of  cloud-based solutions, the digital footprint of enterprises  is growing, and so are the risks.
Technological solutions  have always focused on convenience, transparency, and  an  ever-increasing  ability  to  share  information  and  col- laborate,  while  built-in  security  hasn’t  been  a  priority  until  recently.
Growing privacy and security concerns affect  customer perception.
According to Deloitte, 80% of cus- tomers  are  aware  of  recent  cyber  breaches,  and  50%  of  them are ready to switch brands if they feel their informa- tion  may  be  compromised.
Experian  reported  that  now  cyber  breaches  are  as  devastating  for  the  reputation  of  organizations  as  environmental  disasters  and  poor  cus- tomer service.
Most executives recognize that cyber risks are no longer  on the horizon but are an imminent cost of doing business.
Recent surveys show that cybersecurity is already  part  of  the  agenda  of  80%  of  corporate  boards  (up  from  around  30%  4  years  ago).
Companies  are  adjusting  their  enterprise  risk  management  frameworks  and  including  cyber risks and accompanying controls as part of the nec- essary risk management actions.
Traditional controls intro- duced for in-house infrastructure no longer work, as more  and more operations are performed in the cloud.
Risk  mitigation  approaches  and  technologies  lag  behind the sophistication of the threat.
In fact, our ear- lier  research  with  the  World  Economic  Forum  and  McKinsey showed that 90% of executives feel they only   33  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  have “nascent” and “developing” capabili- ties  to  combat  cyberthreats.
In  this  situa- tion when cyber breaches have become an  inevitable reality of doing business, execu- tives  ask  themselves,  “What  does  it  mean  for  my  business,  how  probable  is  it  that  a  devastating breach will happen to us, and  how much could it cost us?” Still, very few  organizations  have  developed  ways  to  assess  their  cyber  risk  exposure  and  to  quantify them.
In  this  chapter,  we  discuss  the  cyber  value-at-risk framework introduced by the  Partnering for Cyber Resilience initiative of  the World Economic Forum and released at  the Annual Summit in Davos in 2015.
More  than  50  organizations,  including  Wipro,  Deloitte  (project  advisor),  and  Aon,  have  contributed  to  this  effort.
The  framework  laid  the  foundations  for  modeling  cyber  risks and encouraged organizations to take  a  quantitative  approach  toward  assessing  their  cyber  risks  exposure,  which  could  also  help  make  appropriate  investment  decisions.
We  were  delighted  to  see  many  spin-off  projects and initiatives that were initiated as  part of this work and hope they will contrib- ute  to  better  risk  management  tools.
Multiple  other  studies  showed  signifi cant  negative  impact  of  cyber  breaches.
The concept goes back to the   ¦  34   fi nancial services industry and describes the  risk appetite and potential losses for a port- folio  that  an  institution  will  incur  over  a  defi ned period of time and is expressed in a  probability to insure the loss.
In the cyber value-at-risk, we introduced  three major pillars, according to which com- panies can model their risk exposure: exist- ing  vulnerabilities,  value  of  the  assets,  and  profi le of an attacker.
A complete cyber value- at-risk  allows  us  to  answer  the  question:  “Given a successful cyberattack, a company  will lose not more than X amount of money  over period of time with 95% accuracy.” The  application of these models will depend on  particular  industries,  companies,  and  avail- able data and should be built for an organi- zation.
For  example,  vulnerabili- ties can be measured in the number of exist- ing  unpatched  vulnerabilities,  not  up-to- date software, number of successful compro- mises,  or  results  of  internal  and  external  audits.
They  can  be  benchmarked  against  the maturity of existing controls and security  of  networks,  applications,  data,  etc.
Because  cyber breaches are criminal activity, nontech- nical factors, such as behavioral motivations,  are to be considered.
The component of the  value of assets of many organizations is dif- fi cult  to  establish.
This  includes  tangible  assets, such as fi nancial fl ows, infrastructure,  and products, and intangible assets, primarily  data  assets  (customer  and  employee  data,  business  strategies,  intellectual  property),  brand, reputation, and trust of stakeholders.
The   impact  of  losing  these  assets  can  be  unno- ticed  in  the  short  term  but  may  hurt  long- term  profi tability  and  market  leadership  of  an organization.
The cyber value-at-risk model has a num- ber  of  limitations,  including  availability  of  data, diffi culties in calculating probabilities,  and  applicability  across  various  industries,  but it presents a fi rst step and incentives for  organizations  to  move  toward  quantitative  risk management.
By publishing the model,  we aimed to encourage more industry stake- holders to develop comprehensive quantita- tive approaches to cyber risks measurement  and management.
For further examples and  information,  please  refer  to  Wipro’s  use  of  cyber  value-at-risk  for  its  clients,  Deloitte’s  continuous  development  cyber  value-at- risk,  Rod  Becktom’s  cybervar  model,  and  CXOWare’s  Cyber  Risk  application  model.
The  Institute  of  Risk  Management  (IRM)  announced  that  it  will  release  a  cyber  risk  quantifi cation framework to help companies  assess their cyber risks exposure.
The call to  action  from  the  Partnering  for  Cyber  Resilience  effort  was  that  to  develop  a  uni- fi ed  framework  that  can  be  used  by  indus- tries to reduce uncertainty around cyber risks  implications on businesses in the absence of  dominant models and frameworks.
First, as the conversation has  shifted  from  technology  and  information  security  departments  to  boardrooms,  the  question  of  costs  and  risks  becomes  ever  more prevalent.
It helps show the scale and  the  impact  that  cyberthreats  can  have  on  fi nancial targets and overall competitiveness  of  organizations;  helps  defi ne  and  narrow  down  the  investments  required  to  mitigate  those threats; makes it easy to paint compel- ling pictures, build scenarios, and make busi- ness cases; and helps make a determination  whether  any  parts  of  the  risk  can  be  trans- ferred.
Deloitte  has  put  together  a  compre- hensive  model  for  modular  approach  to  cyber  risk  measurement  introducing  the  following  components:  probability  model  (“attractiveness  and  resilience  determine     TOWARD CYBER RISKS MEASUREMENT     breach  probability  distribution”);  hacker  model  (mapping  out  motivations  of  adver- saries in relation to the organization); attack  model  (attack  types  and  characteristics);  asset and loss model (potential loss given a  successful  attack);  security  model  (describ- ing  organizations’  security  posture),  and  company  model  (modeling  organizations’  attractiveness  as  a  target).
Cyberpoint’s  Cy-var  models  looks  at  “time-dependent  valuation  of  assets”  while  taking  into  account  an  organization’s  security  posture  and includes variables such as the values of  intellectual property assets, IT security con- trols  in  place  to  protect  those  assets  and  other  related  risks,  infrastructure  risks,  a  time horizon, and a probability of an attack.
In a workshop organized togeth- er with Deloitte, the World Economic Forum  Partnering  for  Cyber  Resilience  members  defi ned  the  attributes  of  an  ideal  model  of  cyber risks quantifi cation: applicability across  various  industries;  ease  of  interpretation  by  experts and executives alike; association with  real  data  and  measurable  security  events;  scalability  across  organizations  or  even  across the industry; at the same, not relying  on data that are currently absent within most  organizations.
Although  the  cyber  value-at-risk  frame- work  doesn’t  specify  how  to  calculate  the  fi nal  number,  it  presents  core  components  and  gives  examples  of  how  these  compo- nents  can  be  quantifi ed.
For it to be effective, it has to be vali- dated  by  the  industry  stakeholders.
Cyber  value-at-risk aimed to bring together “tech- nical, behavioral and economic factors from  both internal (enterprise) and external (sys- temic) perspectives.” As a next step, it would  be  important  to  understand  dependencies  between  various  components  in  the  frame- work and ways to incorporate these models  into existing enterprise risk frameworks.
It is  important  to  remember  that  organizations  should be wary of new emerging risks and     35  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  consider  cyber  risks  in  addition  to  broader  technology or operational risks.
Overall, the goal was to help raise aware- ness of cyber risks as a standing and regular  cost of doing business and help fi nd a way  to  measure  and  mitigate  those  risks.
This  can  be  done  through  standardization  of  various  risk  factors  and  indicators  into  a  normal distribution.
The components that we looked at in this  chapter help bring together various risk fac- tors  via  “measures  of  risk  likelihood  and  impact.” To achieve a more granular level of  sophistication, quantifi cation and standardi- zation  metrics  must  mature.
Some  of  the  main cited obstacles are availability of data  to  build  models,  lack  of  standardized  met- rics and tools, lack of visibility within enter- prise,  and  inability  to  collect  data  and  dubbed models internally.
It  was discussed that close to real-time sharing  of data between organizations could address  some  of  the  main  challenges  of  datasets'  availability  and  provide  enough  data  to  build models.
Although a silver bullet to achieve cyber  resilience  doesn’t  exist,  organizations  con- sider comprehensive frameworks for quanti- fying  and  mitigating  risk  factors,  including  cyber  risks.
Following  this  model,  compa- nies  will  assess  their  assets  and  existing  controls, quantify vulnerabilities, and know   their attackers and threats.
The most signifi - cant challenge so far is the absence of input  variables,  quality  of  existing  datasets  and,  following  these,  no  standardized  measures  to assess cyber risk exposures.
Building such  a model would require efforts in data classi- fi cation,  encourage  a  strong  organization  leadership,  process  improvement  and  col- laboration, as well improve decision making  across various business areas.
For example,  the car industry, mortgage industry, or most  insurances  have  agreed  on  a  standardized  metrics and data collection; the same should  happen  for  cyber  risks  measurement.
Understanding dependencies between these  variables  and  what  they  mean  for  various  industries  should  be  a  subject  for  cross- industry  collaboration  so  that  input  varia- bles  are  unifi ed.
This  would  help  stimulate  the  development  of  risk  transfer  markets  and  emergence  of  secondary  risk  transfer products to mitigate and distribute  the  risks.
For  organizations,  the  focus  will  shift  from  an  attacker  to  assets  and  how  to  secure  them  in  such  a  distributed  digital  ecosystem,  where  everything  is  vulnerable.
As  more  robust  quantitative  cyber  risks  models emerge and the industries are mov- ing  toward  a  standardized  recognizable  model, the confi dence of digital ecosystems  stakeholders and their ability to make effec- tive decisions will also rise.
Based on Towards the Quantifi cation of Cyber  Threats report.
¦  36   SecurityRoundtable.org  The evolving cyberthreat and an  architecture for addressing it Internet Security Alliance – Larry Clinton, CEO  According  to  the  Pentagon’s  2015  Annual  Report,  “The  military’s  computer  networks  can  be  compromised  by  low to meddling skilled attacks.
Military systems do not  have  a  suffi ciently  robust  security  posture  to  repel  sus- tained attacks.
The development of advanced cyber tech- niques  makes  it  likely  that  a  determined  adversary  can  acquire a foothold in most DOD systems and be in a posi- tion to degrade DOD missions when and if they choose.” If the cyber systems of the world’s most sophisticated  and  best  funded  armed  forces  can  be  compromised  by  “low to meddling skilled attacks,” how safe can we expect  discount retailers, movie studios, or any other corporate  or public systems to be?
The bad news is that the cyber systems that have become  the underpinning of virtually all of aspects of life in the  digital age are becoming increasing less secure.
First, the sys- tem  is  getting  technologically  weaker.
Virtually  no  one  writes code or develops “apps” from scratch.
These  protocols  were  designed  to  be  “open,”  not  secure.
Now  the  attacking  community  is  going  back  through  these  core  elements  of  the  Internet  and discovering still new vulnerabilities.
The  reality  is  that  the  fabric  of  the  Internet  is  riddled  with  holes,  and  as  we  continue  to  stretch that fabric, it is becoming increasingly less secure.
In fast-moving,  early  stage  industry,  developers  have  a  strong  incentive  to  offer  new  functionality  and features, but data protection and priva- cy policies tend to be a lesser priority.
The risks created by the core of the system  becoming  intrinsically  weaker  is  being  fur- ther  magnifi ed  by  the  explosion  of  access  points to the system, many with little or no  security built into their development.
Some  analysts are already asserting that there are  more  mobile  devices  than  there  are  people  on the earth.
It is now common for individuals to have  multiple mobile devices and use them inter- changeably for work and leisure often with- out  substantial  security  settings.
Although  this certainly poses a risk of data being stolen  directly  from  smartphones,  the  greater  con- cern  is  that  mobile  devices  are  increasingly  conduits to the cloud, which holds increasing  amounts  of  valuable  data.
The  number  of   ¦  38   new  access  points  to  large  amounts  of  data  resulting from the explosion in the number of  mobile devices vastly increases the challeng- es to securing cyberspace.
However, the rise in use of mobile devices  pales  in  comparison  to  the  coming  Internet  of Things (IoT).
The IoT, embedded comput- ing  devices  with  Internet  connections,  embraces a wide range of devices, including  home security systems, cars, smart TVs, and  security  cameras.
Like  the  bring-your-own- device (BYOD) phenomenon, the coming of  the IoT further undermines the overall secu- rity of the system by dramatically increasing  the  vectors,  making  every  new  employee’s  internet-connected device, upon upgrade, a  potential threat vector.
The  APT  referred  to  ultrasophisticated  cyberattack  methods  being  practiced  by  advanced  nation-state actors.
These attacks were char- acterized  by  their  targeted  nature,  often  focused  on  specifi c  people  instead  of  networks,  their  continued  and  evolving  nature,  and  their  clever  social  engineering  tactics.
APTs  routinely  compromised  all  anti-virus  intrusion  detection  and  best  practices.
Now  these  same  attack  methods,  once  practiced only by sophisticated nation-states,  are  widely  in  use  by  common  criminals.
Whereas a few years ago these attacks were  confi ned to nations and the Defense Industrial  Complex,  they  now  permeate  virtually  all  economic sectors.
They  are  seeking  to  grow  their  business,  including  fi nding  new  vulnerabilities  in  older  infra- structures  and  thus  widening  the  surface  available for attack.
The economics of cybersecurity favor the attackers.
Cyberattacks are relatively cheap and easy to  access.
Virtually  anyone  can  do  an  Internet  search  and  fi nd  vendors  to  purchase  attack  methods  for  a  comparatively  small  invest- ment.
Multiple reports suggest hundreds  of billions of dollars in criminal cyber reve- nue each year.
The  vast  interconnection  of  the  system  allows attackers to exploit weaker links who  have  permitted  access  to  more  attractive  targets,  and  their  “market”  is  accessible  to  them worldwide.
Meanwhile,  cyber  defense  tends  to  be  almost  inherently  a  generation  behind  the  attackers,  as  anticipating  the  method  and  point of attack is extremely diffi cult.
Moreover,  law  enforcement  is  almost  nonexistent—we  successfully prosecute less than 2% of cyber  criminals, so there is little to discourage the  attackers from being bold.
Furthermore, as  we  have  already  illustrated,  notwithstand- ing  consumers  tend  to  prefer  utility  and  function  over  security,  which  provides  a  disincentive for investors to enhance devic- es  with  added  security,  which  often  slows  or limits utility.
This  little-understood  imbalance  of  the  economic  incentives  is  exacerbated  by  the  fact that many of the technologies and busi- ness  practices  that  have  recently  driven   corporate  growth,  innovation,  and  profi ta- bility also undermine cybersecurity.
Technologies such as VOIP or cloud com- puting bring tremendous cost effi ciencies but  dramatically  complicate  security.
Effi cient,  even necessary, business practices such as the  use of long supply chains and BYOD are also  economically  attractive  but  extremely  prob- lematic from a security perspective.
Corporate  boards  are  faced  with  the  conundrum of needing to use technology to  grow and maintain their enterprises without  risking the corporate crown jewels or hard- won public faith in the bargain.
In addition,  the  fears  and  potential  losses  from  cyber  events tend to be speculative and future ori- ented,  whereas  most  corporate  leaders  (as  well as the citizen investors who have their  401(k)s tied up in the stock market) tend to  make their decisions with an eye toward the  next quarter or two.
The national security equation Finally,  from  the  national  security  perspec- tive, Internet economics are also complicated.
This  economic  puzzle  is  important  to  solve  because  multiple  independent  studies  indi- cate  that  the  number  one  problem  with  securing critical infrastructure from cyberat- tack  is  economic.
The  private  sector  is  legally  required  to  invest  to  maximize  shareholder  value.
Although shareholder value is enhanced to  some degree by security investment, gener- ally  security  is  considered  a  cost  center  in  the corporate world.
As with most corporate  investments, security is a mater of cost ben- efi t  for  the  private  sector.
What  this  trans- lates to is that the private sector may legiti- mately judge that there is a level of security  that  goes  beyond  their  commercial  interest  and hence their legally mandated obligation  to  their  shareholders.
The  reason  he  doesn’t  hire  more  guards  or  put  up  more  cameras or other security measures is that  the cost benefi t presumably suggests it will  cost him 6% to do so, and hence the better  business decision is to tolerate this level of  insecurity.
Surely,  they  have  economic  considerations  with  respect  to  security; however, they are also mandated to  a higher level of security largely irrespective  of cost to provide for national security, con- sumer  protection,  privacy,  and  other  non- economic considerations.
In  the  Internet  space,  government  and  industry are using the same networks.
This  means the two users of the systems have dif- fering  security  requirements—both  legiti- mate  and  backed  by  lawful  authority.
Moreover,  requiring  greater  cybersecurity  spending,  beyond  commercial  interest  as  suggested by some, could run afoul of other  government  interests  such  as  promoting  innovation, competitiveness, and job growth  in a world economy (presumably not follow- ing U.S.-based requirements).
Finally,  the  presumption  that  requiring  increased  security  spending  by  commercial  entities up to the government risk tolerance  is in the corporate self-interest is complicat- ed  by  the  data  that  have  emerged  after  highly  publicized  cyber  breaches.
¦   Some good news: Enlightened policy working   in partnership  Traditional regulatory efforts fail In  2012  President  Obama  offered  a  legisla- tive  proposal  to  Congress  suggesting  that   ¦  40   the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  be  given  authority  to  set  minimum  standards for cybersecurity over the private  sector.
Subsequently  two  bills  were  offered  in  the  Senate,  one  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee,  Senator  Jay  Rockefeller  (D-WV)  with  Senator  Olympia  Snow  (R-ME)  and  separately  by  Senate  Homeland Security Chairman Joe Lieberman  (D-CN)  and  Senator  Susan  Collins  (R-ME).
Even  though  Reid  exercised his parliamentary power to control  the  Senate  agenda,  there  was  not  enough  support to even get the bills to the fl oor for  consideration, let alone vote on it.
There was certainly industry opposition to  these  bills,  but  what  killed  them  was  the  bipartisan realization that the traditional reg- ulatory model was an ill fi t for cybersecurity.
Early  efforts  to  apply  traditional  regulation  to  cyberspace,  such  as  HIPAA  in  the  health-care  industry,  had  not  generated  success.
Indeed  health  care  is  widely  considered  one  of  the  least  cyber secure of all critical infrastructures.
However,  with  cyber  systems  becoming  increasingly ubiquitous and insecure threat- ening  economic  development  and  national  security,  there  was  obvious  need  for  an  affi rmative and effective approach.
The non- regulatory,  collaborative  model  selected  largely  followed  the  “social  contract”  para- digm previously promoted by industry gov- ernment analysts.
In  an  executive  order  on  cybersecurity the president abandoned the  government-centric  regulatory  approach     THE EVOLVING CYBERTHREAT AND AN ARCHITECTURE FOR ADDRESSING IT    embodied  in  his  previous  legislative  pro- posals and the Senate bills.
Instead, he sug- gested  a  public  private  partnership—a  social  contract—that  would  address  the  technical as well as economic issues that are  precluding the development of a cyber sys- tem that can become sustainably secure.
In  this new partnership, industry and govern- ment  would  work  together  to  identify  a  framework of standards and practices wor- thy of industry based on cyber risk assess- ments  conducted  by  the  companies.
If  there were an economic gap between what  ought  to  be  done  and  what  would  be  accomplished  through  normal  market  mechanisms,  a  set  of  market  incentives  would be developed to promote voluntary  adoption  of  the  framework.
Although  industry  that  operates  under  regulatory  systems would remain subject to regulatory  authority,  no  new  regulatory  authority  for  cybersecurity would be part of the system.
Instead, a partnership system based on vol- untary  use  of  consensus  standards  and  practices  and  reinforced  through  market  incentives would be built.
The cyber social contract model has sub- stantial  precedent  in  the  history  of  infra- structure development in the United States.
In the early twentieth century the innovative  technologies  were  telephony  and  electricity  transport.
Initially  the  private  companies  that provided these technologies, because of  natural  economies,  served  primarily  high- density and affl uent markets.
Policy makers  of  the  era  quickly  realized  that  there  was  a  broader social good that would be served by  having  universal  service  of  these  services  but also realized that building out that infra- structure  would  be  costly  and  uneconomic  either for industry or government.
Instead  of  government  taking  over  the  process  or  mandating  that  industry  make  uneconomic  investment,  the  policy  makers  designed  a  modern  social  contract  with  industry.
If  industry  would  build  out  the  networks and provide universal electric and   telephone service at affordable rates, govern- ment  would  guarantee  the  investment  pri- vate  industry  would  make  in  building  and  providing  the  service.
Although  the  Obama  social  contract  approach  to  cybersecurity  has  different  terms  than  that  of  previous  infrastructure  development,  the  paradigm  is  similar.
Similar modifi cations of the incentive model  are also in use in other areas of the economy,  such as environment, agriculture, and trans- portation, but this is the fi rst application in  the cybersecurity fi eld.
The cybersecuri- ty framework development process conduct- ed by the National Institute of Standards and  Technology (NIST) has been completed and  received  virtually  unanimous  praise.
In  an  exceedingly  rare  development,  the  Obama  approach to cybersecurity closely tracks with  that outlined by the House Republican Task  Force  on  Cyber  Security.
Bipartisan  bills  using liability incentives, instead of govern- ment  mandates,  are  moving  through  Congress, and additional incentive programs  are under development.
¦   Conclusion The  cybersecurity  problem  is  extremely  serious  and  becoming  more  so.
Fortunately,  at  least  the  U.S.  government   seems to have developed a consensus strat- egy  to  better  leverage  public  and  private  resources  to  combat  cyberthreats  without  excessively  compromising  other  critical  social  needs.
Although  there  are  some  ini- tial signs of progress, the road to creating a  sustainably  secure  cyber  system  will  be  long and diffi cult.
¦  42   SecurityRoundtable.org  Effective cyber risk management:  An integrated approach Former CIO of the U.S. Department  of Energy – Robert F. Brese  In its 2015 Data Breach Report, Verizon found that in 60%  of the nearly 80,000 security incidents reviewed, including  more than 2,000 confi rmed data breaches, cyber attackers  were able to compromise an organization within minutes.
Data breach- es, compromises in which data loss is unknown, denial of  service  attacks,  destructive  malware,  and  other  types  of  cybersecurity  incidents  can  lead  to  lost  revenue,  reputa- tion  damage,  and  even  lawsuits,  as  well  as  short-  and  long-term  liabilities  affecting  a  company’s  future.
Although “getting hacked” may seem, or even be, inevita- ble,  the  good  news  is  that  by  taking  an  integrated  approach  to  risk  management,  cybersecurity  risk  can  be  effectively managed.
But  who  is  responsible  for  this  integrated  approach,  and what does it include?
Although often the case, man- aging  cybersecurity  risk  should  not  be  left  solely  to  the  chief  information  offi cer  (CIO)  and  chief  information  security  offi cer  (CISO).
Even  though  these  professionals  are  capable,  only  an  integrated  information  (i.e.,  data),  information technology, and business approach will ena- ble a company to effectively manage cybersecurity risk as  a component of an organization’s overarching enterprise  risk  program.
There  is  also  a  movement  for  board-level  involvement  and  reporting,  resulting  in  a  risk  to  board  members’  tenure  if  they  are  not  considered  to  be  suffi - ciently  engaged  in  the  oversight  of  cybersecurity  risk  management  and  incident  response.
Although  somewhat  shocking,  it  should  be  inherently  obvious  that  effective   43  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  cybersecurity  risk  management  is  key  to  meeting the fi duciary responsibilities of cor- porate offi cers and the board.
To  ensure  success,  managing  cybersecu- rity  risk  must  be  an  ongoing  and  iterative  process, not a one-time, infrequent, or check- the-box  activity.
This  area  of  risk  manage- ment  must  grow  with  the  company  and  change  with  ever-evolving  cyber  threats.
Data  holdings  and  information  technology  (IT)  systems,  and  the  Internet-connected  environment in which they operate, change  at a pace that is more rapid than many of the  other variables affecting enterprise risk.
Not  only must the right stakeholders be engaged  at  the  right  levels  within  an  organization,  but  also  the  right  automated  tools  and  processes  must  be  in  place  to  support  risk  decision making and monitoring.
¦   Perfect security is a myth As in physical security, there is no such thing  as  perfect  IT  (cyber)  security.
All  the  fi re- walls,  encryption,  passwords,  and  patches  available  cannot  create  a  zone  of  absolute  safety  that  enables  a  company  to  operate  unimpeded  and  free  of  concern  regarding  the  cybersecurity  threat.
However,  perfect  security is not required, or even desired.
The  effects of too little security are fairly obvious.
However,  too  much  security  unnecessarily  constricts the business’ ability to operate by  reducing the effectiveness and effi ciency of a  customer’s access to the company’s products  and services and unnecessarily constraining  internal  and  business-to-business  (B2B)  interactions.
Effective  risk  management  fi nds  the  balance  between  the  needs  of  the  business to operate and the needs and cost of  security.
¦   Enterprise risk management Gartner, Inc., the world’s leading IT research  and advisory company, has found that cyber- security  risk  management  programs  have  experienced trouble in scaling with corporate  initiatives  in  mobility,  cloud,  big  data,  and   ¦  44   collaboration.
They also predict that the digi- tal  industrial  economy,  and  the  Internet  of  Things (IoT), will result in even greater diffi - culty.
However, attempting to scale cyberse- curity risk management in isolation from an  organization’s  enterprise  risk  program  only  exposes  the  organization  to  greater  risk  by  creating a gap in risk oversight.
Nearly  every  company  has  established  processes to manage enterprise risk.
Larger  companies  often  have  a  chief  risk  offi cer  (CRO) or equivalent individual who is inde- pendent  of  the  business  units  and  is  given  the  authority  and  responsibility  to  manage  the  enterprise  risk  processes.
Incorporating  cybersecurity  into  the  mix  of  corporately  managed  risks  should  be  a  priority.
Some  may argue that cybersecurity is too different  from the other risks a company faces, such as  market  risk,  credit  risk,  currency  risk,  or  physical  security  risk,  to  be  managed  in  a  similar manner.
One  thing  is  certain:  not  all  cybersecurity  risk  can  be  eliminated  through  controls  or  transferred  through  insurance,  so  residual  risk  must  accepted.
Making  good  decisions  requires an integrated, formal approach.
¦   The cybersecurity risk management process There  are  several  key  steps  that  should  be  taken  to  effectively  integrate  cybersecurity  risk  management  into  the  company’s  enter- prise risk management process.
This chapter  doesn’t attempt to explain the details of any  particular process but instead focuses on com- mon attributes that should be used, including  risk framing and assessment, controls assess- ment, risk decision-making, residual risk sign- off, risk monitoring, and accountability.
For  addi- tional details on approaches to cybersecurity  risk  management,  the  National  Institute  of  Standards and Technology (NIST) Computer  Security  Resource  Center  (CSRC),  interna- tional  standards  organizations,  and  other  industry sources may be consulted.
EFFECTIVE CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH    FIGURE  The cybersecurity risk management process  Risk  Framing & Assessment  Controls  Assessment  Accountability  Risk  Decision Making  Residual  Risk Sign-off  Risk  Monitoring  Risk  Framing  and  Assessment:  The  ini- tial  activities  in  risk  management  include  risk  framing  and  assessment  and  controls  assessment.
CIOs  and  CISOs  have  been  assessing  the  risk  to  IT  systems  for  many  years and are well informed on the range of  cybersecurity  threats  and  vulnerabilities  that affect corporate risk.
The  engagement  between  IT  and  the  line of business owners is crucial and must  result in clarity about the type and amount  of risk the business is willing to accept with  respect to the  confi dentiality  disclosure);  (preventing  unauthorized   integrity (preventing unauthorized modifi ca- tion or destruction); and  availability  (ensuring  data  and  systems  are  operational when needed)  of the information and systems on which  the business relies.
Once IT understands the  business  owner’s  risk  threshold,  the  CIO  and  CISO  can  begin  planning,  implement- ing,  and  assessing  the  appropriate  security  controls.
Controls  Assessment:  Preparing  an  appropriate  response  to  risk  requires  the  assessment  of  potential  controls.
Controls  include all of the tools, tactics, and processes   a  company  has  to  avoid,  mitigate,  share,  transfer, or accept risk.
This means that cor- porate  structure,  training  and  awareness  programs,  physical  security,  and  other  options should be considered in addition to  traditional IT controls.
Cyber insurance may  also  be  considered.
Again,  the  CIO  and  CISO cannot do this alone, and there should  be active engagement across all the various  business  lines,  business  support,  and  IT  organizations  that  can  contribute  to  identi- fying potential controls and the impact they  may have on cybersecurity risk.
A  balance  must  be  struck  between  protecting  systems  and  information and the need to effectively run  the  business  that  relies  on  them.
Other  fac- tors  that  should  be  considered  include  the  amount  of  risk  reduction  related  to  imple- mentation  and  maintenance  costs  and  the  impacts on employee training and certifi ca- tion requirements.
An acceptable course of action is identi- fi ed and agreed to by the business, and then  controls are implemented and initially eval- uated  for  effectiveness.
If  the  controls  per- form acceptably, then the sign-off and moni- toring  processes  can  begin.
If  not,  then  a  new  course  of  action  must  be  developed,  which  may  require  further  controls  assess- ment  to  respond  to  the  risk  or  even  addi- tional framing and assessment to adjust the  risk tolerance.
This should be the role of the business  because it is the operational customer of the  risk management process.
Typically,  a  risk  register  has been developed during the risk framing  and  assessment  phase  and  leveraged  throughout all steps of the risk management  process.
If the likelihood or severity  of consequences changes, or if other physical  or  IT  environmental  factors  change,  the   TABLE  treatment plan and/or the accepted level of  residual risk may require revision.
Accountability  ensures  a  formal  risk  management  process  is  followed  and  that  effective  decision-making  is  occurring.
One  person  should  be  accountable  for  the  risk  management  process;  however,  numerous  individuals will be  or  responsible  accountable  for  the  various  steps,  and  many  more  will  be  consulted  informed  and  along  the  way.
Process Step  CIO  CISO  LOB  CRO  Risk Framing and  Assessment  Controls Assessment  Risk Decision-Making  Residual Risk Sign-Off  Risk Monitoring  Accountability  A  A  C  C  A  R  R  R  R  R  R  C  C  C  A  A  C  C  C  I  C  I  C  A  CEO  C  I  I  I  I  C  Board  C  I  I  I  I  C  ¦  46     EFFECTIVE CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH    is by using a RACI matrix (see insert) to iden- tify which person or organization is responsi- ble, accountable, consulted, or informed.
Table  1 provides an example but should be adjusted  to  align  to  the  enterprise  risk  management  and governance processes of the company.
¦   Information supporting cybersecurity risk   management  No  risk  management  is  a  precise  science,  including  cybersecurity  risk  management.
Throughout  the  risk  management  process,  the information required for success has to be  “good enough” to recognize and understand  risks to the level necessary to support effec- tive  decision-making.
Although  complex  mathematical  models  may  work  to  manage  some risks the company faces, forcibly creat- ing objectivity when little or none exists can  actually result in poor or ineffective decisions  by  creating  a  focus  on  the  numbers  rather  than on the meaning of the risk analysis.
¦   Stakeholder engagement A key success factor of ensuring that fi duci- ary responsibilities are fulfi lled in a compa- ny’s  cybersecurity  risk  management  pro- gram is the right level of stakeholder engage- ment.
Framing  and  assessing  risk  requires a clear understanding of corporate  risk  tolerance.
The  line  of  business  lead  should have the responsibility to sign off on  the residual risk, but to make good risk deci- sions,  the  perspectives  of  other  individuals  and  organizations  in  the  company  must  be  consulted  and  taken  into  consideration.
Depending on the system(s) for which risk is  being  evaluated,  some  potential  stakehold- ers  include  the  CIO,  CISO,  chief  fi nancial  offi cer (CFO), legal counsel, and other line of  business owners and external partners with  supporting  or  dependent  relationships.
¦   Evaluating maturity of an organization’s  cybersecurity risk management program  Cybersecurity  risk  management  programs  aren’t  born  effective  and  are  not  immedi- ately  prepared  to  scale  with  the  business.
Equally  important  as  making  effective  risk  management decisions and accepting resid- ual risk is the continuous evaluation of the  process  itself.
Numerous  IT,  cybersecurity,  and  business  consultants,  as  well  as  trade  associations  have  published  guidance,  checklists,  and  suggested  questions  for  board  members.
Although  there  are  many  ways  for  the  C-suite  and  board  to  stay  engaged,  a  company’s  cybersecurity  risk  management  program  must  continuously  mature  to  ensure  future  success.
To  under- stand a program’s growing maturity, ques- tions  should  be  focused  on  evaluating  improvements  in  how  well  risk  is  under- stood and treated, the effectiveness of busi- ness leader and general employee participa- tion,  how  responsive  the  risk  management  process  is  to  change,  and  the  capability  to  effectively respond to an incident.
How  consistent  is  the  understanding  of  the  company’s  tolerance  for  cybersecurity  risk across the C-suite and senior managers?
How  deep  in  the  organization  does  this  understanding go?
How  well  do  line  of  business  owners  understand the cybersecurity risks associat- ed with their business?
Are sound and effec- tive  risk  management  and  acceptance  deci- sions being made in a timely manner to meet  business needs?
Do  employees  report  cybersecurity  issues  and are they incorporated into the risk mon- itoring process?
When threats, vulnerabilities, or other con- ditions  change,  does  the  risk  management  process  respond  and,  when  necessary,  make  sustainable changes to the risk treatment plan?
47  ¦  INTRODUCTIONS — THE CYBERTHREAT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  How  effective  is  the  cyber  incident  response plan?
¦   Effective communications Long-term effectiveness in cybersecurity risk  management requires all employees to fulfi ll  their  responsibilities  of  the  security  of  the  organization  for  which  they  work.
Creating  a  company  culture  of  cybersecurity  risk  awareness is critical and is fostered through  effective  communications.
Leadership  must  understand  how  risk  is  being  measured  across the enterprise, articulate what level is  acceptable, and balance the cost they are will- ing incur for this level of security.
Employees  must  understand  the  basics  of  the  various  cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities and  the  importance  of  their  daily  decisions  and  actions  as  they  go  about  their  business.
Regular training and awareness activities are  essential and can be similar to the “see some- thing,  say  something”  campaigns  related  to  physical  security.
Additionally,  employees  must be empowered and rewarded for iden- tifying cybersecurity issues.
Communicating  cybersecurity  requirements  and  expecta- tions to business partners can improve risk   to  mitigating   decision-making as well as lead to coopera- tive  approaches  risk.
Cybersecurity  risks  also  exist  in  the  supply  chain,  and  communicating  cybersecurity  requirements  and  vetting  suppliers  for  cer- tain critical components or services can effec- tively reduce risk.
Had Target, Home Depot,  and  certain  other  high-profi le  cyberattack  victims built stronger cybersecurity relation- ships  with  external  partners,  their  risk  of  becoming a victim may have been reduced.
By integrating cybersecurity risk man- agement into the enterprise risk management  process  and  by  effectively  engaging  IT  and  business executives, cybersecurity risk can be  understood  and  managed.
Finally, continuous evaluation of the risk  management process, including its effective- ness  and  responsiveness  to  change  and  to  incidents, is necessary to ensure effectiveness  is sustained.
¦  48   SecurityRoundtable.org  Cyber risk and the  board of directors  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  The risks to boards of directors  and board member obligations Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP – Antony Kim, Partner;  Aravind Swaminathan, Partner; and Daniel Dunne, Partner  As cyberattacks and data breaches continue to accelerate  in number and frequency, boards of directors are focusing  increasingly on the oversight and management of corpo- rate  cybersecurity  risks.
An  array  of  federal  and  state  enforcement  agencies  and  regulators, most notably the Department of Justice (DOJ),  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority  (FINRA),  and  state  Attorneys  General,  among  others,  identify  board  involvement  in  enterprise-wide cybersecurity risk management as a cru- cial factor in companies’ ability to appropriately establish  priorities,  facilitate  adequate  resource  allocation,  and  effectively respond to cyberthreats and incidents.
As SEC  Commissioner  Luis  A.  Aguilar  recently  noted,  “Boards  that  choose  to  ignore,  or  minimize,  the  importance  of  cybersecurity  responsibility  do  so  at  their  own  peril.”1  Indeed, even apart from the regulators, aggressive plain- tiffs’  lawyers,  and  activist  shareholders  are  similarly  demanding that boards be held accountable for cyberse- curity.
Shareholder derivative actions and activist investor  campaigns  to  oust  directors  are  becoming  the  norm  in  high-profi le security breaches.
A survey by  the  NYSE  Governance  Services  (in  partnership  with  a  leading  cybersecurity  fi rm)  found  that  cybersecurity  is  discussed at 80% of all board meetings.
More troubling, a June 2015  study by the National Association of Corporate Directors  found that only 11% of respondents believed their boards  possessed a high level of understanding of the risks associ- ated with cybersecurity.2 This is a diffi cult position to be in:  aware of the magnitude of the risks at hand but struggling   51  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  to understand and fi nd solutions to address  and mitigate them.
In this chapter, we explore the legal obli- gations of boards of directors, the risks that  boards  face  in  the  current  cybersecurity  landscape,  and  strategies  that  boards  may  consider in mitigating that risk to strengthen  the corporation and their standing as dutiful  directors.
Obligations of Board Members  The term “cybersecurity” generally refers to  the  technical,  physical,  administrative,  and  organizational safeguards that a corporation  implements  to  protect,  among  other  things,  “personal  information,”3  trade  secrets  and  other intellectual property, the network and  associated  assets,  or  as  applicable,  “critical  infrastructure.”4 This defi nition alone should  leave no doubt that a board of directors’ role  in  protecting  the  corporation’s  “crown  jew- els” is essential to maximizing the interests of  the corporation’s shareholders.
Generally, directors owe their corporation  fi duciary duties of good faith, care, and loy- alty,  as  well  as  a  duty  to  avoid  corporate  waste.3 The specifi c contours of these duties  are  controlled  by  the  laws  of  the  state  in  which the company is incorporated, but the  basic  principles  apply  broadly  across  most  jurisdictions  (with  Delaware  corporations  law often leading the way).
To encour- age individuals to serve as directors and to  free corporate decision making from judicial  second-guessing, courts apply the “business  judgment  rule.”  In  short,  courts  presume  that  directors  have  acted  in  good  faith  and  with reasonable care after obtaining all mate- rial information, unless proved otherwise; a  powerful  presumption  that  is  diffi cult  for  plaintiffs  to  overcome,  and  has  led  to  dis- missal  of  many  legal  challenges  to  board   ¦  52   action  or  inaction.
To  maximize  their  per- sonal protection, directors must ensure that,  if the unthinkable happens and their corpo- ration falls victim to a cybersecurity disaster,  they have already taken the steps necessary  to  preserve  this  critical  defense  to  personal  liability.
In the realm of cybersecurity, the board of  directors has “risk oversight” responsibility:  the board does not itself manage cybersecurity  risks; instead, the board oversees the corpo- rate systems that ensure that management is  doing so effectively.
Generally, directors will  be  protected  by  the  business  judgment  rule  and will not be liable for a failure of oversight  unless there is a “sustained or systemic fail- ure of the board to exercise oversight—such  as an utter failure to attempt to assure a rea- sonable  information  and  reporting  system  exists.” This is known as the Caremark test,5  and  there  are  two  recognized  ways  to  fall  short:  fi rst,  the  directors  intentionally  and  entirely fail to put any reporting and control  system in place; or second, if there is a report- ing and control system, the directors refuse to  monitor  it  or  fail  to  act  on  warnings  they  receive from the system.
The risk that directors will face personal  liability  is  especially  high  where  the  board  has  not  engaged  in  any  oversight  of  their  corporations’  cybersecurity  risk.
For example, a director may fail to exercise  due  care  if  he  or  she  makes  a  decision  to  discontinue  funding  an  IT  security  project  without  getting  any  briefi ng  about  current  cyberthreats  the  corporation  is  facing,  or  worse, after being advised that termination  of  the  project  may  expose  the  company  to  serious threats.
The Personal Liability Risk to Directors  Boards of directors face increasing litigation  risk in connection with their responsibilities     THE RISKS TO BOARDS OF DIRECTORS AND BOARD MEMBER OBLIGATIONS    for  cybersecurity  oversight,  particularly  in  the form of shareholder derivative litigation,  where  shareholders  sue  for  breaches  of  directors’ fi duciary duties to the corporation.
A “books and records demand” is a common  predicate for a shareholder derivative action,  and  this  particular  shareholder  has  already  indicated that the purpose of her request is  to  determine  whether  Home  Depot’s  man- agement breached fi duciary duties by failing  to  adequately  secure  payment  information  on its data systems, allegedly leading to the  exposure of up to 56 million customers’ pay- ment card information.
Although  there  is  some  variation  in  the  derivative claims brought to date, most have  focused on two allegations: that the directors  breached their fi duciary duties by making a  decision that was ill-advised or negligent, or   by  failing  to  act  in  the  face  of  a  reasonably  known  cybersecurity  threat.
Recent  cases  have included allegations that directors:   ?
failed  to  implement  and  monitor  an   effective cybersecurity program;   ?
failed   to   implement  and  maintain  internal  controls  to  protect  customers’  or  employees’  personal  or  fi nancial  information;   ?
failed  to  take  reasonable  steps  to  timely  notify  individuals  that  the  company’s  information  security  system  had  been  breached;   ?
In  addition,  with  the  myriad  of  federal  and  state  laws  that touch on privacy and security, directors  may  also  lose  their  immunity  based  on  “knowing  violations  of  law.”  Given  the  nature of shareholder allegations in deriva- tive  litigation,  these  are  important  consid- erations,  and  importantly,  vary  depending  on the state of incorporation.
Directors should also be mindful of stand- ard  securities  fraud  claims  that  can  be  brought against companies in the wake of a  data  breach.
Securities  laws  generally  pro- hibit public companies from making material     53  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  statements  of  fact  that  are  false  or  mislead- ing.
As companies are being asked more and  more  questions  about  data  collection  and  protection  practices,  directors  (and  offi cers)  should  be  careful  about  statements  that  are  made regarding the company’s cybersecurity  posture and should focus on tailoring cyber- security-related  risk  disclosures  in  SEC  fi l- ings  to  address  the  specifi c  threats  that  the  company faces.
Cybersecurity  disclosures  are  of  keen  interest  to  the  SEC,  among  others.
Very  recently,  the  SEC  warned  companies  to  use  care in making disclosures about data secu- rity and breaches and has launched inquiries  to  examine  companies’  practices  in  these  areas.
The  SEC  also  has  begun  to  demand  that  directors  (and  boards)  take  a  more  active role in cybersecurity risk oversight.
In May 2014, just  weeks  after  Target  released  its  CEO,  Institutional  Shareholder  Services  (ISS),  a  leading  proxy  advisory  fi rm,  urged  Target  shareholders  to  seek  ouster  of  seven  of  Target’s ten directors for “not doing enough  to  ensure  Target’s  systems  were  fortifi ed  against security threats” and for “failure to  provide  suffi cient  risk  oversight”  over  cybersecurity.
Thoughtful,  well-planned  director  involvement  in  cybersecurity  oversight,  as  explained below, is a critical part of a com- prehensive program, including indemnifi ca- tion  and  insurance,  to  protect  directors  against  personal  liability  for  breaches.
Moreover, it can also assist in creating a com- pelling narrative that is important in brand  and reputation management (as well as liti- gation  defense)  that  the  corporation  acted  responsibly  and  reasonably  (or  even  more  so) in the face of cybersecurity threats.
Business  judgment  rule  protection  is  strengthened  by  ensuring  that  board  mem- bers receive periodic briefi ngs on cybersecu- rity  risk  and  have  access  to  cyber  experts  whose  expertise  and  experience  the  board  members  can  rely  on  in  making  decisions  about  what  to  do  (or  not  to  do)  to  address  cybersecurity risks.
Most importantly, direc- tors cannot recklessly ignore the information  they receive, but must ensure that manage- ment  is  acting  reasonably  in  response  to  reported  information  the  board  receives  about risks and vulnerabilities.
Operationally,  a  board  can  exercise  its  oversight in a number of ways, including by  (a) devoting board meeting time to presenta- tions  from  management  responsible  for  cybersecurity and discussions on the subject,  to help the board become better acquainted  with  the  company’s  cybersecurity  posture  and  risk  landscape;  (b)  directing  manage- ment to implement a cybersecurity plan that  incentivizes  management  to  comply  and  holds  it  accountable  for  violations  or  non- compliance; (c) monitoring the effectiveness  of such plan through internal and/or exter- nal  controls;  and  (d)  allocating  adequate  resources  to  address  and  remediate  identi- fi ed  risks.
Boards  should  consider  appointing a chief information security  offi cer  (CISO),  or  similar  offi cer,  and  meet  regularly  with  that  individual  and  other  experts  to  understand  the  threat  company’s  risk  actors,  and  strategies  to  address   landscape,     THE RISKS TO BOARDS OF DIRECTORS AND BOARD MEMBER OBLIGATIONS    that  risk.
Appointing  a  CISO  has  an  additional benefi t. Reports suggest that  companies that have a dedicated CISO  detected  more  security  incidents  and  reported lower average fi nancial losses  per incident.8      Boards should also task a committee  or  subcommittee  with  responsibility  for cybersecurity oversight, and devote  time  to  getting  updates  and  reports  on  cybersecurity  from  the  CISO  on  a  periodic  basis.
As  with  audit  committees  and  accountants,  boards  can  improve  oversight  by  recruiting  a  board  member  with  aptitude  for  the  technical  issues  that  cybersecurity  presents, and placing that individual on  the  committee/subcommittee  tasked  with  responsibility  for  cybersecurity  oversight.
Cybersecurity presentations,  however, need not be overly technical.
Management  should  use  established  analytical risk frameworks, such as the  National  Institute  for  Standards  and  Technology “Framework for Improving  Critical  Infrastructure  Cybersecurity,”  (usually  referred  to  as  the  “NIST  Cybersecurity  Framework”)  to  assess  and measure the corporation’s current  cybersecurity  posture.
These  kinds  of  frameworks  are  critical  tools  that  have  an  important  role  in  bridging  the communication and expertise gaps  between  directors  and  information  security  professionals  and  can  also  help  translate  cybersecurity  program  maturity  into  metrics  and  relative  relationship  models  that  directors  are  accustomed to using to make informed  decisions  about  risk.
sufficiently   informed   implementation   and  enforcement.
Boards should require that  management implement an enterprise- wide  cybersecurity  risk  management  plan and align management’s incentives  to  meet  those  goals.
Although  the   (b)  Plan               (c)  Monitor   builds   systems,   details  of  any  cybersecurity  risk  management  plan  should  differ  from  company  to  company,  the  CISO  and  management  should  prepare  a  plan  that  includes  proactive  cybersecurity  assessments of the company’s network  and  employee  awareness  of  cybersecurity  risk  and  requires  periodic  training,  manages  engagements  with  third  parties  that  are  granted  access  to  the  company’s  network  and  information,  builds  an  incident  response  plan,  and  conducts  simulations  or  “tabletop”  exercises  to  practice and refi ne that plan.
The board  should  further  consider  incentivizing  the CISO and management for company  compliance  with  cybersecurity  policies  and procedures (e.g., bonus allocations  for  meeting  certain  benchmarks)  and  create  mechanisms  for  holding  them  responsible for noncompliance.
With   an  enterprise-wide  cybersecurity  risk  management  plan  fi rmly  in  place,  boards  of  directors  should  direct  that  management  create  internal  and  external controls to ensure compliance  and  adherence  to  that  plan.
Similar  to  internal  fi nancial  controls,  boards  should direct management to test and  certify  compliance  with  cybersecurity  policies and procedures.
For example,  assuming that management establishes  a  policy  that  software  patches  be  installed  within  30  days  of  release,  management  would  conduct  a  patch  audit,  confi rm  that  all  patches  have  been  implemented,  and  have  the  CISO certify the results.
Alternatively,  boards  can  also  retain  independent  cybersecurity  fi rms  that  could  be  engaged  by  the  board  to  conduct  an  audit,  or  validate  compliance  with  cybersecurity policies and procedures,  just  as  they  would  validate  fi nancial  results in a fi nancial audit.
With  information  in  hand  about  what  the     55  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  company’s  cybersecurity  risks  are,  and an analysis of its current posture,  boards  should  allocate  adequate  resources to address those risks so that  management  is  appropriately  armed  and funded to protect the company.
Directors are well-advised to proactively ful- fi ll  their  risk  oversight  functions  by  driving  senior management toward a well-developed  and  resilient  cybersecurity  program.
In  so  doing,  board  members  will  not  only  better  protect  themselves  against  claims  that  they  failed to discharge their fi duciary duties, but  will strengthen their respective organizations’  ability  to  detect,  respond,  and  recover  from  cybersecurity crises.
Personal information is defi ned under a  variety of federal and state laws, as well  as  industry  guidelines,  but  is  generally  understood to refer to data that may be  used  to  identify  a  person.
For  example,  state breach notifi cation laws in the U.S.  defi ne  personal  information,  in  general,  as  including  fi rst  name  (or  fi rst  initial)  and  last  name,  in  combination  with  any  of  the  following:  (a)  social  security  number;  (b)  driver’s  license  number  or   other  government-issued  identifi cation;  (c)  fi nancial  or  credit/debit  account  number plus any security code necessary  to  access  the  account;  or  (d)  health  or  medical information.
Presidential  Policy  Directive  21  (PPD-21)  identifi es  the  following  16  critical  infrastructure  sectors:  chemicals,  commercial  facilities,  communications,  critical  manufacturing,  dams,  defense  industrial  base,  emergency  services,  energy,  fi nancial  services,  food  and  agriculture,  government  facilities,  healthcare  and  public  health,  information  technology, nuclear, transportation, waste,  and wastewater.
See Critical Infrastructure  Sectors,  Department  of  Homeland  Security,  available  at  http://www.dhs.
Consistent with Clapper, most  data  breach  consumer  class  actions  have  been  dismissed  for  lack  of  “standing”:  the  requirement  that  a  plaintiff  has  suffered  a  cognizable  injury  as  a  result  of  the  defendant’s  conduct.
¦  56   SecurityRoundtable.org  Where cybersecurity meets  corporate securities: The SEC’s  push to regulate public companies’  cyber defenses and disclosures Fish & Richardson P.C.
– Gus P. Coldebella,  Principal and Caroline K. Simons, Associate  The  risks  associated  with  cyberattacks  are  a  large  and  growing concern for American companies, no matter the  size or the industry.
If a company is publicly traded, how- ever,  there’s  a  signifi cant  additional  impetus  for  execu- tives’  cyber  focus:  the  ever-increasing  attention  the  U.S.  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  pays  to  cybersecurity issues.
The SEC, as one of the newest gov- ernment players in the cybersecurity space, is fl exing its  regulatory muscles—including by mandating and scruti- nizing  cybersecurity  risk  disclosures,  prodding  compa- nies  to  disclose  additional  information,  and  launching  investigations after a breach comes to light.
This  chapter  explores  the  SEC’s  expanding  role  as  cyber regulator and the growing nexus between cyberse- curity  and  corporate  securities.
It  gives  companies  a  primer on the background and sources of the SEC’s cyber  authority, discusses tricky disclosure and securities regu- lation-related issues, and provides a potential framework  for  companies  to  think  about  whether,  how,  and  when  they  should  publicly  disclose  cybersecurity  risks,  and— when the inevitable happens—cyberattacks.
¦   The SEC’s authority to regulate cybersecurity Generally, a company’s duty to disclose material infor- mation  under  U.S.  securities  laws  arises  only  when  a  statute or SEC rule requires it, and currently, no existing  laws or rules explicitly refer to disclosure of cyber risks  or incidents.
Even so, the SEC has made it clear that it  will  use  authorities  already  on  the  books  to  promote  cybersecurity  in  public  companies.
During  the  SEC’s  March  2014  “Cybersecurity  Roundtable,”  Chairman  Mary  Jo  White  said  that,  although  the  SEC’s  “formal  jurisdiction  over  cybersecurity  is  directly  focused  on  the integrity of our market systems, customer data pro- tection,  and  disclosure  of  material  information,  it  is   57  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  incumbent on every government agency to  be informed on the full range of cybersecu- rity  risks  and  actively  engage  to  combat  those  risks  in  our  respective  spheres  of  responsibility.”  In  other  words—formal  jurisdiction  notwithstanding—the  SEC  will  use  every  tool  it  has  to  combat  cyber  risks.
Given  that  cyber  disclosures  can  have  an  effect  on  corporate  reputations  and  stock  price,  give  would-be  attackers  information  about  vulnerabilities,  and  trig- ger  shareholder  and  other  litigation  and  government  companies  anguish over exactly when, what, and how  much to disclose.
To answer these questions,  it  is  crucial  to  understand  the  background  and  contours  of  existing  requirements  and  the SEC’s expectations.
investigations,   ¦   History and background of the SEC’s   cybersecurity oversight  In May 2011, Senator Jay Rockefeller sent a  letter to then-SEC Chairman Mary Schapiro  urging  the  SEC  to  “develop  and  publish  interpretive  guidance  clarifying  existing  disclosure requirements pertaining to infor- mation security risk.” Rockefeller, frustrated  with Congress’s inability to pass cybersecu- rity legislation, identifi ed the SEC’s control  over corporate public disclosure as a vehicle  to promote security in the absence of legisla- tion.
Even  though  it’s  not  an  SEC  rule  itself,  the  Guidance  announced  the  Division’s  view  that—”although  no  existing  disclosure  requirement explicitly refers to cybersecurity  risks  and  cyber  incidents”—existing  SEC  rules, such as Regulation S-K, “may impose”  obligations to disclose cybersecurity and cyber  events in a company’s periodic reporting.
¦  58   ¦   Contours of the SEC’s staff guidance Taking  its  cues  from  Regulation  S-K,  the  Guidance details the key places where cyber- security  disclosures  may  appear  in  a  com- pany’s  10-Ks  and  10-Qs.
The  company’s  risk  factors  are the central place for cyber disclosure.
If  cybersecurity  is  among  the  most  signifi cant  factors  making  investment  in  the  company  risky,  the  risk  factor  disclosure  should  take  into  account  “all available relevant information” from  past  attacks,  the  probability  of  future  attacks  occurring,  the  magnitude  of  the  risks—including  third-party  risk,  and  the  risk  of  undetected  attacks— and  the  costs  of  those  risks  coming  to  pass,  including  the  potential  costs  and  from  misappropriation of IP assets, corruption  of  data,  or  operational  disruption.
If the costs or other consequences  of  a  cyberattack  represent  a  material  trend,  demand,  or  uncertainty  “that  is  reasonably likely to have a material effect  on  the  registrant’s  results  of  operations,  liquidity,  or  fi nancial  condition  or  would  cause  reported  fi nancial  information  not  to  be  necessarily  indicative  of  future  operating  results  or  fi nancial  condition,”  the company should address cybersecurity  risks  and  its  Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of  Operations (MD&A).
incidents   cyber   in    ?
If  one  or  more  cyber  incidents  materially  affected  the  company’s  products,  services,  customer  or  supplier  relationships,  or  competitive  conditions,  suggests  disclosure in the “Description of Business”  section.
If any litigation arose as  a result of a cyber incident, the Guidance  suggests disclosure if material.
If  signifi cant  costs  are  associated  with  cyber  preparedness  or remediation, they should appear in the  company’s fi nancial statements.
risk   requesting   ¦   SEC post-guidance practice Of course, guidance is just guidance unless  the SEC, through its actions, gives it teeth.
Under  Sarbanes-Oxley,  the Division reviews every public compa- ny’s reports at least once every three years,  and  the  Division  has  focused  intensely  on cyber disclosures since the Guidance— especially  factor  disclosures.
Google,  Amazon,  AIG,  Quest  Diagnostics, and Citigroup are just some of  the  scores  of  public  companies  that  received letters from staff urging enhanced  disclosures of their cyber risks.
¦   Tips for preparing 10-K and 10-Q cyber   disclosures  According  to  a  recent  survey  by  Willis,  87%  of  Fortune  500  companies  claim  to  have  complied  with  the  Guidance.
Certain  noteworthy  trends  that  emerge  from  these  letters  follow:  Trend 1: Staff pushes for all cyber incidents  to  be  disclosed—material  or  not.
Even  so,  and  even  though  the  Guidance  calls  for  disclosure  of  “cyber  incidents...  that  are  individually, or in the aggregate, material,”     WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES  staff  comments  have  consistently  urged  companies  to  disclose  past  data  breaches  that  are  not  material,  even  in  the  face  of  companies’ well-reasoned positions to the  contrary.
By fi rst man- dating  cybersecurity  risk  factors  via  the  Guidance,  and  then  urging  even  non- material  incidents  to  be  included  in  those  risk factors for “context,” the staff appears  to be pushing for disclosure of past cyber  events notwithstanding materiality.
Trend 2: Staff will research cyber incidents— and  ask  about  them.
The  staff’s  practice  is  to  ask  for  analysis  supporting  the conclusion that no further disclosure is  necessary, including a discussion of mate- riality  from  a  fi nancial  and  reputational  risk standpoint.
59  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  Trend  3:  Staff  is  interested  not  only  in  the  disclosure,  but  the  pre-disclosure  process.
As  Chairman White has stated, even with the  absence of a direct law or regulation directly  compelling  companies  to  adopt  strict  cybersecurity  measure,  the  SEC  is  exercis- ing its power to indirectly prod companies  to analyze and strengthen their cybersecu- rity  programs  through  issuing  disclosure  guidance  and  bringing  investigations,  enforcement actions, and litigation against  companies  that  fall  short.
In  this  way  the  SEC  has  taken  on  a  larger  mission  than  simply requiring disclosure—it is using its  existing  authorities  to  steer  companies  to  engage  in  a  deep,  searching  process  to  evaluate  cyber  risk.
Whether  or  not  you  think the SEC is the appropriate regulator  of  this  area,  such  a  searching  analysis  is  important  to  securing  a  company’s  digital  assets.
Management should engage in and  document its analysis of the effects of cyber  incidents  on  the  company’s  operations,  with  special  attention  to  probability  of  various types of attacks and their potential  cost,  from  a  quantitative  and  qualitative  standpoint.
Staff  is  encouraging  companies  to  look  beyond  their  four  walls  to  the  cyber  risk  posed  by  the  use  of  vendors.
The  SEC  likely  believes  that  if  public  companies  are  required  to  disclose  risks in their supply chain in addition to their  own,  third-party  cybersecurity  will  improve  as a result.
However, no currently- existing  securities  law  or  rule  expressly  requires  cyberattacks—material  or  other- wise—to be reported on Form 8-K. Generally,  reporting  cyber  events  is  entirely  voluntary.
Public  companies  must  navigate  issues  such  as  materiality, selective disclosure, trading, and  effect  on  stock  price,  all  in  an  environment  where  disclosure  of  a  cyber  event  is  almost  sure to draw a lawsuit, a government investi- gation, or other unwanted scrutiny.
Can  an  8-K  eliminate  a  plaintiff’s  or  regulator’s  argu- ment that an insider traded on the basis on  material non-public information?
The determina- tion of whether a cyber event is material is  not  clear-cut.
First,  the  Supreme  Court  has  rejected  a  bright-line,  quantitative  rule  for  materiality—instead  reaffi rming  Basic  v.  Levinson’s  formulation  that  any  nonpublic  information that signifi cantly alters the total     WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES  Fish & Richardson 8-k Disclosure Decision Tree  No  Yes  Will you disclose  anyway via website, to third parties, etc.?
No  Not sure Will it compromise  security?
Will it trigger securities or  other litigation  or investigations?
Not sure  No  No  Will insiders trade  while in possession of  this information?
If incident is truly not material and   x i r t a  M    s n o C d n a       s o r P K - 8     plaintiffs’ argument that  information was not known  to the market or was not  adequately disclosed, cutting  off potential securities claims  to the date of the 8-K  2.
May counter allegations that   insiders were trading on  basis of material nonpublic  information about the breach  (so long as insider trades  happen after 8-K issued)  was not going to be discovered,  could needlessly cause reputational  harm and draw litigation and other  unwanted scrutiny  2.
May be seen as concession that  incident was material (although  companies frequently disavow  materiality in 8-K), and even if not  material, may make incident seem  bigger than it is  Continued    61  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  TABLE  Pros Pros Pros Pros Pros Pros Pros Pros Pros Pros  Cons Cons Cons Cons Cons Cons Cons Cons Cons Cons  n n n n n n n n n n o o o o o o o o o o s s s s s s s s s s d d d d d d d d d d r r r r r r r r r r a a a a a a a a a a h h h h h h h h h h c c c c c c c c c c i i i i i i i i i i R R R R R R R R R R & & & & & & & & & & h h h h h h h h h h s s s s s s s s s s i i i i i i i i i i F F F F F F F F F F                                            x x x x x x x x x x i i i i i i i i i i r r r r r r r r r r t t t t t t t t t t a a a a a a a a a a M M M M M M M M M M                                           s s s s s s s s s s n n n n n n n n n n o o o o o o o o o o C C C C C C C C C C d d d d d d d d d d n n n n n n n n n n a a a a a a a a a a                     s s s s s s s s s s o o o o o o o o o o r r r r r r r r r r P P P P P P P P P P K K K K K K K K K K - - - - - - - - - - 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8                       3.
Allows company to own the  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  message, rather than giving  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  control of the message to  someone else someone else someone else someone else someone else someone else someone else someone else someone else someone else  3.
Could draw other hackers to test   company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses company’s defenses  mix of information available to shareholders  could  well  be  material.
Although it is relatively easy for  a company to decide to announce a breach of  customer personal information (because the  breach will likely have to be disclosed under  state law and because remediation costs may  be  signifi cant),  what  should  a  company  do  about,  for  example,  theft  of  trade  secrets,  such as source code for a big-selling software  product?
Without more (such as the thieves’  development and marketing of a competing  product), such a theft may not have a mate- rial  effect  on  the  company’s  fi nancial  state- ments.
If the  company  made  public  statements  about  its  information  systems  or  other  aspects  of  its   operations affected by a cyberattack, and the  statements  were  inaccurate  or  misleading  when  made,  the  company  has  an  obligation  to  correct  the  statements—even  if  it  only  learned of the inaccuracy afterwards.
Other  disclosure  requirements  may  be  at play, such as any state notifi cation laws that  require companies to inform affected individ- uals  if  their  personally  identifi able  informa- tion  (PII)  was  stolen  during  an  attack.
If  the  company  is  listed  on  an  exchange  such  as  NYSE  or  NASDAQ,  the  trading  markets  themselves  may  also  have  rules  requiring  timely notifi cation of material events.
Absent  a  mandatory  disclosure  requirement,  a  company may still have reasons to disclose  the  attack  to  stakeholders.
There  may  be  contractual  obligations  to  customers  or  other  third  parties  to  communicate  about  breaches involving their information.
Thus,  the  company  should  have  a  coordinated,  unifi ed  disclosure  strategy  to  ensure  that  all  interested  parties  are  informed in a consistent manner, and very  close  in  time.
Companies  can  use  affi rma- tive disclosure to mitigate any reputational  harm  or  embarrassment  that  could  arise  from  having  the  narrative  created  on  your  behalf  by  the  media,  security  researchers,  hackivists, or worse.
Reg FD prohibits companies from  selectively  disclosing  material  non-public  information  to  analysts,  institutional  inves- tors, and certain others without concurrently  making widespread public disclosure.
It is worth considering whether dis- closures  on  a  company’s  website,  or  other- wise to customers, vendors, or other parties,  trigger a Reg FD requirement.
Another reason  that  the  materiality  determination  is  a  tricky one is that insiders in possession of  material  nonpublic  information  may  not  trade  while  in  possession  of  that  informa- tion.
If there is even a chance that the cyber  incident may be material, an early call that  a  public  company  general  counsel  must  make  is  whether  to  close  the  trading     WHERE CYBERSECURITY MEETS CORPORATE SECURITIES  window  for  insiders.
(Of course, if the incident  is  material,  no  trading  by  insiders  should  occur until information about the incident  is made public.)
Because  a  disclosure  should  be  accurate  and  not  misleading  when  made,  a  company  should  grasp  the  scope of the cyber incident before disclos- ing.
Or  disclose  when  you  have  a  better  grasp  of  what  actually  happened,  but  face  accusa- tions  of  allowing  earlier  (and  potentially  rosier)  cybersecurity  disclosures  to  persist  uncorrected?
Generally,  companies  should  resist falling into the immediate disclosure  trap,  because  in  our  experience  a  cyber  incident  looks  very  different  at  the  end  of  the fi rst week than it does at the end of the  fi rst  day.
Furthermore,  the  company  will     63  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  not want to have to correct itself after mak- ing its cyber disclosure—it will want to get  it right the fi rst time.
¦   SEC cybersecurity enforcement The  SEC  has  not  yet  brought  an  enforce- ment  action  against  a  public  company  related  to  its  cybersecurity  disclosures.
It  has,  however,  opened  investigations  look- ing  not  only  into  whether  companies  ade- quately  prepared  for  and  responded  to  cyber incidents but also as to the suffi ciency  of their disclosures relating to the breaches.
Target’s  February  2014  Form  8-K  fi ling   revealed that the SEC was among the gov- ernment  agencies  investigating  the  2013  data breach, including “how it occurred, its  consequences, and our responses.”  With the growing threat of cyberattacks  and mounting pressure from Congress and  the  public,  future  regulatory  and  enforce- ment actions are almost assured.
¦  64   SecurityRoundtable.org  A cybersecurity action plan  for corporate boards Internet Security Alliance, NACD – Larry Clinton, CEO  of ISA and Ken Daly, President and CEO of NACD  With  the  majority  of  cyber  networks  in  the  hands  of  the  private sector, and the threats to these systems apparent and  growing, organizations need to create an effective method  to govern and manage the cyber threat.
In fact, the  word cyber is derived from the same Greek word, kybernan,  from which the word govern also derives.
¦  How is cyber risk different from other corporate risks?
However, many of the traditional assumptions and under- standings about physical security don’t apply to securing  digital assets.
First, unlike many corporate risks, such as natural dis- asters,  cybersecurity  risks  are  the  product  of  conscious  and  often  better-resourced  attackers,  including  nation  states  and  state  affi liates.
This  means  that  the  attack  methods,  like  the  technology,  will  change  constantly,  responding to defensive techniques and often in a highly  strategic  fashion.
This  characteristic  of  cyberattacks  means  that  the  risk  management  system  must  be  a  dynamic 24/7/365 fl exible process—a full team sport— requiring participation from all corners of the organiza- tion rather than being the primary responsibility of any  one particular entity.
Second, with many traditional human-based corporate  risks, such as criminal activity, companies can plug into a   65  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  in  defending   well-defi ned  legal  superstructure  including  enforcement power, which can greatly assist  the  organization  itself.
Unfortunately,  in  the  cyber  world  this  sys- tem  is  dramatically  underdeveloped.
In  addition  to  the  major  problem  of  many  attackers  actually  receiving  state  support,  the  international  criminal  legal  system  has  not evolved to the point where there is any- thing close to the cooperation and coordina- tion  generally  available  in  the  physical  world.
As a result, current estimates are that  law  enforcement  is  able  to  apprehend  and  convict less than 2% of cyber criminals.
Third,  corporate  cybersecurity  is  not  con- fi ned  to  traditional  corporate  boundaries.
Whereas in the physical world a particularly  conscientious  organization  might  be  able  defend  itself  by  having  an  especially  strong  security  perimeter,  the  cyber  world  is  essen- tially borderless.
A fundamental characteristic  of cyber systems is that they are interconnect- ed  with  other,  independent  systems.
This  means  that  a  board  must  consider  not  only  their  “own” security but that of all the entities with  whom  they  interconnect,  including  vendors,  customers, partners, and affi liates.
Fourth,  unlike  many  physical  risks,  in  which the security effort is to create a perim- eter around an asset, so many modern corpo- rate  assets  are  in  fact  digital.
Cyber  risk  must be considered as an integral part of the  business  process.
A  good  deal  of  modern  corporate  growth,  innovation,  and  profi ta- bility is inherently tied to digital technology.
Rare is the entity that has by now not built  the benefi ts of digitalization into their busi- ness plan in many different ways, including  online  marketing,  remote  business  produc- tion,  employee  use  of  personal  mobile  devices,  cloud  computing,  big  data,  out- sourced  process,  and  off-site  employment.
¦  66   However,  many  digital  technologies  and  business processes that drive business econ- omies come with major cybersecurity risks,  which as discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 6),  can put the corporation at a long-term cata- strophic risk.
This means that cyber risk must be con- sidered not as an addendum to a business  process or asset, but as a central feature of  the business process.
In the modern world,  cybersecurity  is  as  central  to  business  decisions as legal and financial considera- tions.
Thus,  a  board’s  consideration  of  fundamental  business  decisions  such  as  mergers, acquisitions, new product devel- opment,  partnerships,  and  marketing  must include cybersecurity.
¦  Are corporate boards concerned about   cybersecurity?
Although some critics have assumed that the  publicity from high-profi le corporate breaches  is prima facie evidence of corporate inatten- tion to cybersecurity, the evidence does not  support that proposition.
Corporate spending on cybersecurity has  doubled  over  the  past  few  years  and  now  totals more than $100 billion a year.
By com- parison, the total annual budget for the U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security  is  only  about  $60  billion—including  TSA  and  immigration—with only $1 billion for cyber- security.
Total U.S. government spending on  cybersecurity  is  generally  estimated  to  be  near  $16  billion.
Moreover,  recent  surveys  indicate  cybersecurity  now  tops  the  list  of  issues corporate boards must face—replacing  leadership  succession,  and  two  thirds  of  board members are seeking even more time  and attention paid to cybersecurity.
Although the data seems to show conclu- sively  that  corporate  boards  are  aware  of  and becoming ever more interested in cyber- security,  the  novelty  and  complexity  of  the  issue has led to a fair amount of uncertainty  as to how to approach it.
One recent survey found that despite the  “spotlight on cyber security getting bright- er” that nearly half of directors had not dis- cussed  the  company’s  crisis  response  plan   in  the  event  of  a  breach,  67%  had  not  dis- cussed the company’s cyber insurance cov- erage, nearly 60% had not discussed engag- ing  an  outside  cybersecurity  expert,  more  than 60% had not discussed risk disclosures  in  response  to  SEC  guidance,  and  slightly  more than 20% had discussed the National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST) cybersecurity framework.
¦  A corporate board action plan   for cybersecurity  In an effort to fi ll the gap between awareness  and targeted action, The National Association  of Corporate Directors (NACD), in conjunc- tion  with  AIG  and  the  Internet  Security  Alliance,  published  their  fi rst  Cyber  Risk  Oversight Handbook for corporate boards in  June  2014.
The  handbook  was  the  fi rst  pri- vate  sector  document  endorsed  by  the  U.S.  Department of Homeland Security as well as  the  International  Audit  Foundation  and  is  available free of charge either through DHS  or  NACD.
It  identifi ed  fi ve  core  principles  for corporate boards to enhance their cyber  risk oversight.
The fi nal two princi- ples deal with how the board should handle  the senior management.
Understand  that  cybersecurity  is  an   enterprise-wide risk management issue.
The  board  has  to  oversee  management  in  setting  the  overall  cyber  strategy  for  the  organization, including how cybersecurity is  understood  in  terms  of  the  business.
It  is  critical that the board not approach the topic  simply  by  thinking,  “What  if  we  have  a  breach?” Virtually every organization will be  successfully  breached.
The  board  has  to  understand the issue is how to manage the  risks caused by breaches, not to focus solely  on how to prevent them.
One useful metaphor is to think of corpo- rate cybersecurity in a similar fashion to how  we  think  of  our  own  personal  health.
Obviously, it is impractical to be totally germ     A CYBERSECURITY ACTION PLAN FOR CORPORATE BOARDS    free, even as a goal.
When  you  do  get  sick,  as  we  all  eventually  do, you detect and understand the infection  promptly  and  accurately  and  get  access  to  the  appropriate  expertise  and  treatment  so  that you can return to your normal routine as  soon as possible—ideally wiser and stronger.
Thinking of cybersecurity narrowly as an  IT issue to be addressed simply with techni- cal solutions is a fl awed strategy.
The single  biggest  vulnerability  in  cyber  systems  is  people.
Building on the NACD model, the Institute  of Internal Auditors (IIA) extended NACD’s  principle  1  by  commenting  that  the  board  should  receive  an  internal  annual  health  check  of  the  organization’s  cybersecurity  program  that  covers  all  domains  of  the  organization’s  cybersecurity,  including  an  assessment  of  if  the  enterprise  risk  levels  have improved or deteriorated from year to  year,  and  comments  specifically  that  “Sarbanes-Oxley  compliance  provides  little  assurance  of  an  effective  security  program  to manage cyber risks.”    2.
Directors  must  understand  the  legal   implications of cyber risk.
For example, high-profi le  attacks  may  spawn  lawsuits,  including  shareholder derivative suits alleging that the  organization’s  board  neglected  its  fi duciary  duty by failing to take steps to confi rm the  adequacy  of  the  company’s  protections  against  breaches  of  customer  data.
67  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  Prudent steps for directors to take include  maintaining records of discussions related to  cyber  risks  at  the  board  and  key  committee  meetings.
These records may include updates  about  specifi c  risk  as  well  as  reports  about  the company’s overall security program and  how  it  is  addressing  these  risks.
Evidence  that board members have sought out special- ized  training  to  educate  themselves  about  cyber  risk  may  also  be  helpful  in  showing  due diligence.
No  one  standard  applies,  especially  for  organizations  who  do  business  in  multiple  jurisdictions.
Some  countries,  including  the  U.S.  have  received  specifi c  guidance  from  securities  regulators.
Again, building on the NACD model, IIA  emphasizes that this legal analysis must be  extended  to  third  parties  and  recommends  that the board get a report of all the critical  data that are being managed by third-party  providers  and  be  sure  the  organization  has  appropriate  agreements  in  place,  including  audits  of  these  providers.
Board  members  need  adequate  access  to   cybersecurity expertise.
Add to this the fact that most acknowl- edge that directors lack the needed expertise  to evaluate cyber risk, and the board is left  with  the  conundrum  of  how  to  get  enough  time to become properly educated to address  this serious issue.
One answer is to increase the use of out- side experts working directly with the board  to provide independent assessments.
Indeed,   ¦  68   some  boards  are  now  recruiting  cyber  pro- fessionals for board seats to assist in analyz- ing and judging staff reports.
Many organizations have  delegated the task to a special committee— often  audit  but  sometimes  a  risk  or  even  technology  committee—although  no  one  approach  has  been  demonstrated  clearly  superior.
Still another technique is to empower the  board  with  the  right  questions  to  ask  and  require  that  the  outside  or  internal  experts  answer the questions in understandable ter- minology.
The NACD Cyber Risk Handbook  provides  lists  of  5  to  10  simple  and  direct  questions  for  board  members  covering  the  key  issues  such  as  strategy  and  operation  readiness,  situational  awareness,  incident  response, and overall board “cyber literacy.” At minimum, boards can take advantage  of  the  company's  ongoing  relationships  with  law  enforcement  agencies  and  regu- larly make adequate time for cybersecurity  at  board  meetings.
The fi nal two principles offered by NACD  focus on how boards should deal with senior  management:   4.
Directors need to set an expectation that  management  have  an  enterprise-wide  cyber  risk  management  framework  in  place.
It  is  important  that  someone  be  thinking  about cybersecurity, from an enterprise-wide  perspective  (i.e.,  not  just  IT)  every  day.
The   important aspect to ensure, however, is that  the  risk  management  is  truly  organization  wide, including the following steps:   ?
appoint  a  cross-organization  cyber  risk  management  team  including  all  relevant  stakeholders  (e.g.,  IT,  HR,  compliance,  GC, fi nance, risk)   ?
develop  an  organization-wide  cyber  risk  management  plan  with  periodic  tests  reports  and  refi nements.
At  a  more  technical  level,  the  Cyber  Security  Framework  developed  by  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technologies  (NIST) is a useful model.
develop  an  independent  and  adequate  budget  for  the  cyber  risk  management  team.
One  mechanism  to  implement  the  frame- work  is  to  create  a  “cybersecurity  balance  sheet”  that  identifi es,  at  a  high  level,  the  company’s  cyber  assets  and  liabilities  and  can provide a scorecard for thinking through  management  progress  in  implementing  the  security  system.
The  balance  sheet  may  begin  with  identifying  the  organization’s  “crown  jewels.”  This  is  an  important  exer- cise because it is simply not cost effi cient to  protect  all  data  at  the  maximum  level.
However,  the  organization’s  most  valued  data must be identifi ed (e.g., IP, patient data,  credit  card  data).
Other  corporate  data  can  be  similarly  categorized  as  to  its  relative  security needs.
The next step is to discuss the strategy for  securing  data  at  each  level.
This  strategy  generally involves a consideration of people,  process, and technology.
At the technology process levels there are  a  range  of  options  available  with  good  research indicating cost-effective methods to  secure  lower-level  data  and  thus  reserving  deployment  of  more  sophisticated,  and  hence costly, measures to be reserved for the  higher valued data.
A CYBERSECURITY ACTION PLAN FOR CORPORATE BOARDS    At the people level, it is important to follow  leading  practices  for  managing  personnel,  especially  with  respect  to  hiring  and  fi ring.
Ongoing  cybersecurity  training  is  similarly  important and most effective if cybersecurity  metrics  are  fully  integrated  into  employee  evaluation and compensation methods.
Of  special  attention  is  the  inclusion  of  senior  and  other  executive  level  personnel  who, research has shown, are highly valued  targets  and  often  uniquely  lax  in  following  through on security protocols.
The  asset  management  process  then  can  be considered in light of the business prac- tices that may create liabilities.
For example, the expansion of the number  of access points brought on by the explosion  in mobile devices and the emerging “Internet  of Things” (connecting cars, security camer- as,  refrigerators,  etc.
to  the  Internet)  really  increases vulnerability (see Chapter 6).
Here management may feel pressure  to gen- erate  value  through  the  merging  of  highly  complex  and  technical  information  systems  on  accelerated  pace.
In  discussions  with  management,  the  board  must  carefully  weigh  the  economics  of  the  IT  effi ciencies  the company seeks with the potential to miss  or create vulnerability by accessing a system  that is not well enough understood or had its  defi ciencies mitigated.
Based on the plan, management needs to  have a method to assess the damage of a  cyber event.
Organizations  must  identify  for  the  board  which data, and how much, the organization  is willing to lose or have compromised.
This principle highlights the need for the  “full-team”  approach  to  cybersecurity  advocated  under  principle  4.
For  example,  the  marketing  department  may  determine     69  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  that a particular third-party vendor is ideal  for a new product.
The CISO may determine  that  this  vendor  does  not  have  adequate  security.
This  is  an  example  of  the  process  pro- ceeding  appropriately,  wherein  cyber  risk  is  integrated  into  business  decisions  con- sistent and managed on the front end con- sistent  with  the  organization’s  business  plan.
If  an  organization  follows  these  princi- ples,  it  should  be  well  on  its  way  to  estab- lishing a sustainably secure cyber risk man- agement system.
¦  70   SecurityRoundtable.org  Establishing a board-level  cybersecurity review blueprint Stroz Friedberg LLC — Erin Nealy Cox,  Executive Managing Director  Over the last two years cybersecurity has leaped to the top  of the boardroom agenda.
If you’re like most board mem- bers, though, you haven’t had enough time to fi gure out  how to think about cybersecurity as part of your fi duciary  responsibility, and you’re not quite certain yet what ques- tions to ask of management.
Cybersecurity  is  taking  its  place  among the catalog of enterprise risks that demand board- room attention for the long term.
It comes along with the  digital transformation that is sweeping through virtually  all industries in the global economy.
Cybersecurity risk is not new.
However, in the last two  years multiple high-profi le attacks have hit brands we all  trusted  with  our  personal  information,  making  for  big  headlines  in  the  media  and  signifi cant  reputational  and  fi nancial damage for many of the victimized companies.
Cybersecurity legislation is a per- ennial  agenda  item  for  governments  and  regulators  around  the  world,  and  shareholder  derivative  lawsuits  have  struck  the  boards  of  companies  hit  by  high-profi le  cyberattacks.
Although  directors  have  added  cybersecurity  enter- prise risk to their agendas, there is no standard way for  boards to think about cybersecurity, much less time-tested  guidelines to help them navigate the issue.
This chapter’s  goal is to help directors evolve their mindsets for thinking   71  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  about  the  enterprise  risk  associated  with  cybersecurity  and  provide  a  simple  blue- print  to  help  directors  incorporate  cyberse- curity into the board’s overall enterprise risk  strategy.
¦   Establishing the right blueprint for   boardroom cybersecurity review  For boards, cybersecurity is an issue of enter- prise  risk.
This  universally  understood  enterprise  risk  guideline is especially helpful in the context  of cybersecurity because no one can prevent all  cyber breaches.
Every company is a target, and  a suffi ciently motivated and well-resourced  adversary can and will get into a company’s  network.
Consequently, terms like “cyber defense”  are  insuffi cient  descriptors  of  an  effective  posture  because  they  evoke  the  image  that  corporations  can  establish  an  invincible  perimeter around their networks to prevent  access  by  bad  actors.
Today,  it’s  more  accu- rate to think of the board-level cybersecurity  review  goal  as  “cyber  resilience.”  The  idea  behind  the  cyber  resilience  mindset  is  that,  because  you  know  network  breaches  will  happen,  it  is  more  important  to  focus  on  preparing to meet cyberthreats as rapidly as  possible  and  on  mitigating  the  associated  risks.
Also  important  to  a  board  member’s  cybersecurity mindset is to be free from fear  of  the  technology.
Just  as  you  need  not  understand  internal  com- bustion engine technology to write rules for  safe driving, you need not be excluded from  the  cybersecurity  risk  discussion  based  on  lack of technology acumen.
Although this is  liberating,  in  a  sense,  there  is  also  a  price:  directors cannot deny their fi duciary respon- sibility  to  oversee  cybersecurity  risk  based  on lack of technology acumen.
Given a focus on enterprise risk (not tech- nology)  and  risk  mitigation  (not  attack  prevention), the correct blueprint for cyber- security review at the board level can best be   ¦  72   expressed through the following three high- level questions:   1.
Has  your  organization  appropriately  assessed  all  its  cybersecurity-related  risks?
Have  you  appropriately  prioritized  your  cybersecurity  risks,  from  most  critical  to  noncritical?
Are  these  priorities  properly  aligned  with  corporate  strategy,  other  business  requirements,  and  a  customized  assessment  of  your  organization’s  cyber  vulnerabilities?
What  actions  are  you  taking  to  mitigate  cybersecurity risks?
Naturally, these questions are proxies for the  industry-specifi c  and/or  situation-specifi c  questions  particular  to  each  organization  that  will  result  in  that  organization’s  most  productive cybersecurity review.
The key to  formulating the relevant questions for your  organization  is  to  fi nd  the  right  balance  between asking enough to achieve the assur- ance appropriate to board oversight, but not  so much that management ends up spinning  wheels unnecessarily.
The rest of this chapter is a guide to fram- ing  board-level  cybersecurity  review  issues  for your organization by exploring meaning- ful ways to apply these high-level questions  in a variety of circumstances and industries.
The next step is yours, or your board’s: use  this  blueprint  to  drive  cybersecurity  enter- prise  risk  discussions  with  management,  critical  stakeholders,  and  external  experts.
Doing  so  will  help  achieve  cyber  resilience  for your organization.
¦   The board’s cyber resilience blueprint Boards are very comfortable managing fi nan- cial  issues  and  risks.
They  have  audit  committees,  they  have  compensation  com- mittees, their members include former CFOs  (to  populate  those  committees),  and  they  have plenty of experience reviewing fi nancial     ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT    statements and analyzing profi t and loss.
It is useful to juxtapose this stable, com- fortable picture with the state of board-level  cybersecurity  discussion—that  is,  you  may  not yet be certain what questions to ask, or  know  what  to  expect  from  management’s  responses.
To help accelerate you toward the  same level of stability and comfort you have  managing  fi nancial  issues,  the  following  board-level cybersecurity review blueprint is  organized into six areas:   1.
Inclusive   board-level   discussion:  empowering all directors to be accountable  for cybersecurity   2.
Proactive  cyber   risk  management:  incorporating cybersecurity into all early  stage business decisions   3.
Risk-oriented prioritization: differentiating  assets for varying levels of cyber protection  4.
Investment  in  human  defenses:  ensuring  the organization’s cybersecurity investment  goes beyond technical to include awareness,  education,  and  training  programs  for  employees   5.
Assessments of third-party relationships:  limiting cyber exposure through business  partners  6.
Inclusive board-level discussion Given  the  rapidly  growing  threat  posed  by  cybercrime  and  the  potentially  devastating  consequences of a major breach, it is critical  that every director have enough of an under- standing of cyber risk to be able to take an  active  part  in  the  board’s  cybersecurity   review  process,  and  that  these  discussions  take  place  regularly—preferably  at  every  meeting of the board.
A  committee  responsible  for  studying  cybersecurity  risk  can  cover  both  of  these  aspects  of  participation.
With  such  a  committee,  someone  on  the  board  (i.e.,  the  committee  chair)  becomes  the  stakeholder  charged with becoming educated about cyber- security risk and educating the broader group.
Although the board will never need to know  how to confi gure a fi rewall, there is much to  learn about the nature of cybersecurity risks,  their potential impacts on your organization,  and successful mitigation approaches.
It may  also be appropriate to appoint a director with  cybersecurity expertise for this purpose.
Establishing such a committee also fulfi lls  the  goal  of  consistent  cybersecurity  discus- sion.
Threat intelligence is an exam- ple of an excellent topic for an outside expert  because  it’s  not  a  specialty  most  organiza- tions have in house or that can be justifi ably  developed.
A person or organization steeped  in  analyzing  the  tools,  approaches,  and  behaviors  of  threat  actors  can  look  at  your  organization’s  profi le  and  provide  custom- ized  insight  that  accelerates  the  board’s  cybersecurity education.
To  empower  all  directors  to  engage  in  cybersecurity  review,  board-level  discus- sions should address issues in the enterprise  risk language with which boards are already  familiar.
Establish a cybersecurity risk committee, or add the subject to an existing enterprise   risk committee.
Discuss cybersecurity risk at every board meeting.
Empower all directors to become educated and comfortable discussing cybersecurity risk.
73  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  2.
Proactive cyber risk management It  is  important  to  incorporate  discussion  of  cybersecurity  risk  in  all  business  decisions,  from  the  beginning,  because  it  is  much  harder  and  far  less  effective  to  consider  cybersecurity after the fact.
Whether a deci- sion has to do with corporate strategy, new  product  launches,  facilities,  customer  inter- action, M&A, legal or fi nancial issues, man- agement should always proactively consider  cybersecurity risk.
As an example, take the white-hot omni- channel marketing trend, which has retailers  using mobile technology to collect data from  their  customers,  and  then  exploiting  that  knowledge  to  better  target  marketing  and  promotions—sometimes,  at  the  moment  a  customer  walks  into  the  store.
Do  the  mobile  applications  that  make  these  approaches  possible  expose  their  organizations  to  new  vulnerabilities?
No matter how exciting the  revenue-driving opportunity, these are ques- tions  that  retail  boards  should  be  asking  management as part of the decision to pur- sue  such  initiatives.
Management  should  respond  with  some  variation  of,  “Our  soft- ware vendor says their security is `X, and in  addition, we’re doing our own testing to see  how vulnerable the software may be before  we introduce it to our customers.”  Boards should extrapolate the thinking in  the  above  example  to  all  aspects  of  their  business  decision-making.
To  apply  proac- tive  thinking  to  cyber  strategy,  consider  growth through M&A.
Boards should think  through  M&A  cybersecurity  risks  in  multi- ple  dimensions.
To  name  three:  adding   cybersecurity analysis of the target to their  diligence  process;  protecting  their  M&A  process  from  cyber  breaches;  and  potential  cyber  exposure  resulting  from  post-deal  integration.
In  both  of  these  examples,  it  should  be  clear how challenging it would be to address  cybersecurity  concerns  after  the  initiative  gets underway.
Because  there are an infi nite number of cybersecurity  measures  in  which  a  company  can  invest,  the trick is to prioritize such measures based  on a customized assessment of the most seri- ous  threats  facing  your  organization.
Such  assessments  should  be  approached  along  two  primary  dimensions:  your  organiza- tion’s  most  valuable  assets  and  its  greatest  cyber vulnerabilities.
Every  board’s  cybersecurity  review must ask management what meas- ures  are  being  taken  to  protect  a  compa- ny’s  most  critical  assets,  beginning  with  development  and  on  through  production  and distribution.
Beyond the most critical  are other assets that require differentiated  gradations  of  protection.
Identifying  and  prioritizing  those  assets  is  an  information  governance  challenge,  so  the  board  also  has to understand the organization’s infor- mation  governance  policy  and  have  a  sense  for  the  quality  of  its  execution.
Has  the company identifi ed what are sensitive   Proactive cyber risk management, in sum:  ?
Think about potential cybersecurity risk from the outset of all business initiatives from   corporate strategy to new types of customer interaction.
¦  74     ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT    data and where they are being held?
Are  your  retention  policies  ensuring you keep the information that is  important  and  throw  away  everything  else?
We’ve  all  read  headlines  about  breaches  that  could  have  been  less  sensa- tional  if  the  victims  had  better  retention  practices.
The  second  dimension—your  compa- ny’s  cyber  vulnerabilities—is  where  cus- tomized  threat  intelligence  plays  a  role.
Analyzing  your  network  for  weaknesses,  learning  where  sensitive  information  is  stored and how it is protected, and assess- ing your environment: the competitiveness  of  your  industry  (e.g.,  how  valuable  your  intellectual  property  is  to  others)  and  the  way  information  fl ows  in  concert  with  business  processes  (e.g.
whether  or  how  you store sensitive information about con- sumers  or  clients,  what  countries  you  do  business in, and what that implies for your  security).
The board’s cybersecurity review should  include discussion of both dimensions, and  the issues should be discussed often—these  risks  are  not  static.
They  can  vary  signifi - cantly  over  time  and  depend  on  evolving  Internet  connectivity  and  infrastructure  complexity.
Investment in human defenses Cyber  defense  and  cyber  resilience  are  as  much  human  matters  as  they  are  matters  of  products  and  technology  confi gura- tions.
Although  security  technologies  for  protection and response are indeed neces- sary,  boards  should  also  ask  about  enter- prise-wide  cybersecurity  education  and   awareness.
When  looking  at  cybersecurity  invest- ment,  board  reviews  should  include  classic  IT  spending  on  systems  that  authenticate  user identity and manage access, as well as  compliance with applicable laws and regula- tions.
Should we hire “white hat” hackers to attack  our networks in search of gaps?
No matter how well your security technol- ogy works, hackers can always go after the  weakest  link—humans—through  a  combi- nation of tactics known as social engineer- ing  and  spear  phishing.
Boards  should  ask  about, support, and ensure these programs  are aligned with business requirements.
Ensure the quality of policies and practices around the organization’s approach to   information governance so that all assets are protected appropriately.
75  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  Human investment, in sum: Supplement appropriate investment in information security products with continuous  enterprise-wide cybersecurity awareness, education, and training programs.
Assessments of third-party relationships Those  of  us  paying  close  attention  to  the  stories behind 2014’s cyber breach headlines  know that in many cases the so-called “attack  vectors”  came  through  third-party  relation- ships.
Bad  actors  breached  a  business  part- ner (that likely had weaker security than the  intended  target)  and  then  used  that  part- ner’s access credentials to break into the tar- get company.
But this is only one way in which third- party  relationships  create  security  vulnera- bilities.
As business collaboration surges, for  example,  the  amount  of  confi dential,  trade  secret, and intellectual property information  that  is  being  shared  among  employees  of  business partners skyrockets.
This electronic  fl ow  of  mission  critical  information,  often  across the open Internet, creates an environ- ment ready-made for economic espionage.
It  used to be such cases were a particular thorn  in  the  side  of  only  a  few  sectors,  such  as  defense,  energy,  and  technology.
Today,  all  kinds of industries are targeted.
A  board’s  cybersecurity  review  should  include an understanding of how the organ- ization  conducts  cyber  due  diligence  on  third  parties.
Once  a  partner  is  identi- fi ed  as  high  risk  (e.g.,  they  have  access  to  your corporate network), that partner’s own  security  posture  must  be  understood.
How  much visibility does your organization have  into  your  vendors’  security  policies  and   practices?
Do they respond to your security  questionnaires?
Boards  also  should  require  IT  involve- ment  early  in  the  development  of  new  business  partner  relationships.
That  way,  information  access  can  be  better  tuned  to  the  business  requirements  of  the  partner- ship.
An  HR  vendor,  for  example,  may  need access to your employee data, but that  access may not need to be around the clock.
Perhaps it can be controlled and limited to  certain times of the month and/or hours of  the  day  to  limit  risk  exposure  and  enable  fi nely tuned security monitoring.
Incident response policies and procedures Armed with the knowledge that perfect secu- rity  isn’t  achievable  and  breaches  are  there- fore  inevitable,  boards  must  ensure  their  organizations  have  well-honed  policies  for  cyber incident response, and must test these  plans with regular simulation exercises.
Good  incident  response  plans  defi ne  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  response  team  (including  crisis  communications,  human  resources,  legal,  IT,  etc.)
and  estab- lish clear initial action items, including noti- fi cations  to  internal  and  external  resources  who  will  lead  an  investigation  or  manage  communications.
Remember,  preparing  for  the worst is not an admission of a weak or  vulnerable  network.
On  the  other  hand,  a  delayed,  bumbling  response  to  a  security  breach is what often leads to increased data  loss,  exposure  to  regulatory  action,  and  reputational damage.
Assessments of third-party relationships, in sum: Review all business partner relationships for potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
Empower IT’s involvement earlier in the development of business relationships.
¦  76     ESTABLISHING A BOARD-LEVEL CYBERSECURITY REVIEW BLUEPRINT    Two key thoughts boards should keep in  mind  when  reviewing  incident  response  plans were noted previously, albeit in a dif- ferent context.
IT security professionals can only do so  much if an employee clicks on a spear phish- er’s  link,  creating  a  hole  in  your  network.
Employees are on  the front lines of cybersecurity; prompt notice  of a breach from an alert employee can often  signifi cantly mitigate damage.
Second, your  organization’s  cybersecurity  risk  environ- ment is a dynamic, ever-changing thing.
Appropriate board-level review questions   include the following:  What are the organization’s policies and pro- cedures to rapidly identify breaches?
What are we doing to align our cyber respons- es to business requirements and to ensure that  all parts of the business understand their roles  in the response plan?
The  goal  of  a  board’s  cybersecurity review is to avoid being unpre- pared  for  a  cyber  incident.
Unfortunately,  experience so far suggests that the only com- panies  with  truly  top-grade,  board-level  cybersecurity plans are those that have expe- rienced an unpleasant surprise in the form of  a  bad  breach.
The  review  approach  described  in  this  chapter  will  enable you to lead your organization’s shift  from  a  paradigm  of  discomfort  and  uncer- tainty in the cybersecurity risk realm to one  of  assurance  and  comprehensive  answers,  facilitated by the board’s regular cyber risk  discussions;  from  simple  perimeter  protec- tion  to  around-the-clock  monitoring  and  universally  understood  incident  response;  from lack of cyber risk awareness to enter- prise-wide  awareness  led  by  top-down  C-suite  messaging  and  incentivized  employee behavior.
The  blueprint  presented  in  this  chapter  can help ensure you truly have your eye on  the cyber risk ball.
But if—or when—you are, you will be able  to  handle  the  event  with  clear-eyed  confi - dence  that  the  risks  have  been  properly  managed.
77  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  S ’ D R A O B   E H T  CYBER REVIEW blueprint  Inclusive Board-Level Discussion  Proactive Cyber Risk Management  Risk-Oriented Prioritization  Investment in Human Defenses  Assessment of Third-Party Relationships  Incident Response Policies and Procedures  ¦  78   SecurityRoundtable.org  Demystifying cybersecurity  strategy and reporting: How  boards can test assumptions Dell SecureWorks – Mike Cote, CEO  Cybersecurity is one of those issues that justify the state- ment,  “It’s  what  you  don’t  know  that  can  hurt  you.”  Although  board  engagement  in  cybersecurity  risk  is  on  the rise, corporate directors continue to struggle with the  complexity of the subject matter, making it more diffi cult  for  them  to  assess  whether  the  company’s  strategy  is  effective.
As one public company director recently stated,  “I understand the magnitude of the risk, and I know we  have  signifi cant  resources  decked  against  it,  but  as  a  board  member  how  will  I  know  if  management  has  the  right  measures  in  place  to  keep  us  from  being  the  next  story in the news?”  This chapter does not explain how to eliminate the risk  of a data breach.
In fact, one requirement for being resil- ient  against  cyberthreats  is  to  accept  that  breaches  will  happen.
After all, the board’s job is to provide reason- able oversight of the risk, not manage it.
What  this  chapter  does  do  is  provide  boards  with  a  framework  of  inquiry—elements  of  a  mature  security  strategy in plain language—to help directors have discus- sions  with  management  about  the  company’s  overall  resilience  against  the  threats.
By  understanding  these  concepts,  directors  will  have  a  better  context  for  testing  assumptions when management reports on metrics such  as the effectiveness of breach prevention, breach frequen- cy, and response time.
Before delving into the right strategy for cybersecurity, it  is helpful for boards to fi rst understand the nature of the  threat.
Hacking has become a burgeoning global industry  that generates billions of dollars in illicit trade annually.
It’s fueled by a strong reseller’s market in which hackers  sell stolen data to others who possess the desire but not   79  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  the  tools  to  harvest  valuable  intellectual  property.
It’s funded by organized crime and  actors  within  nation-states  that  not  only  operate  beyond  any  jurisdiction  but  also  have access to billions of dollars of capital to  invest in these criminal operations.
The robust cyber black market offers sto- len  goods—from  credit  cards  to  personal  identities—in  large  quantities  at  reasonable  cost.
Buyers can  obtain tutorials for hacking or for using sto- len data, and they can even hire subcontrac- tors to do the dirty work.
There are thou- sands  of  cyber  criminals  around  the  globe.
They work around the clock, for free or for  hire,  on  speculation  or  with  a  known  pur- pose, trying to invent new ways to steal or  harm a company.
They have the funding and  technology to be not only persistent but also  highly adaptable, and the barrier to replicat- ing their cyber weapons is low in contrast to  the physical world.
Companies, on the other hand, are highly  visible, and by virtue of being connected to  the Internet must operate in an environment  where  being  attacked  by  hackers  is  the  norm.
A mature cybersecurity strategy prepares  for  and  responds  to  this  challenging  envi- ronment.
Breaking  that  strategy  down  into  its core elements provides boards with a use- ful  framework  for  discussing  risk  assump- tions  with  the  chief  information  security  offi cer.
¦  80   ¦  Elements of a mature security strategy .
What  do  cyber  criminals  want  that  they  can  get  from  us  and  why?
Do  we  collect  personally  identifi able  informa- tion that cyber criminals could sell to iden- tity  thieves?
Do  we  store  customer  account  information?
How  would  someone  take  command  and  control  of  our  infrastructure  or systems?
Many  boards are surprised to learn that the infor- mation security team is fending off hackers  across the entire enterprise, even outside it:  for  example,  in  a  supplier’s  network,  on  a  home  computer,  or  on  an  employee’s  iPad,  where he or she just reviewed a proprietary  schematic.
Hackers  are  capable  of  scanning  for  vulnerabilities  wherever  someone  con- nects  to  the  Internet,  and  business  leaders  must  operate  under  the  assumption  that  even they are a target.
As  with  sensitive  fi nancial  information,  only  those  who  need  access  to  the  assets  should have it, and policies should be in place  to  ensure  stringent  controls.
Administrator  passwords  are  gold  to  cybercriminals,  and  increasing the number of people with access  to  them  effectively  multiplies  the  ways  that  hackers can attack.
It’s tempting to think that we can eliminate  breaches if we just put more effort into pre- vention  at  the  front  end,  but  information  security professionals know that eliminating  the  possibility  of  a  breach  is  an  unrealistic  goal  in  today’s  environment.
Preventative  tools such as fi rewalls play an essential role  because  they  provide  the  fi rst  layer  of  defense: they ‘recognize’ and stop the threats     DEMYSTIFYING CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AND REPORTING: HOW BOARDS CAN TEST ASSUMPTIONS   we  already  know  about.
No  one  piece  of  technology  can  provide a complete defense.
A good security  program assumes that at some point preven- tion  will  fail  and  the  business  will  have  to  deal with threats in its network.
Companies need the right technology, pro- cesses,  programs,  and  staff  to  help  them  detect what has happened so that they can  fi nd  the  threat  and  respond  more  quickly  to contain and eradicate it.
Board  members  may  test  this  assumption  by  asking  their  security  team,  “Do  we  know  if  hackers  are  inside  our  defenses  right  now?
If a compa- ny’s  security  team  can’t  “see”  what  is  hap- pening on the network and across all of the  endpoints  such  as  work  stations,  point-of- sale terminals, and mobile devices, then the  company will have little chance to detect or  respond  quickly  to  an  attack  when  preven- tion fails.
Visibility across the enterprise is an  essential attribute of the cybersecurity strat- egy  because  it  helps  companies  respond  to  unusual  activity  more  quickly,  reducing  down time and related costs.
Unfortunately  those  data  are  useless  if  the  security  team  doesn’t have the bandwidth to analyze and  act on it.
The information security industry  has responded to this problem, and services  are  available  to  manage  the  data,  do  the  heavy lifting, and sort out what is actionable.
The actionable data can then be fed back to  the  information  security  team  to  more  effi - ciently zero in on the threats that need their  immediate attention.
Boards may ask if their  security team is managing all the data itself,  and, if so, does it still have the bandwidth to  focus on the actual threats.
To stay one step ahead of the threat, an infor- mation security program should also be able  to  predict  what  the  adversary  will  do  next.
To make fi nancial predictions, business lead- ers  apply  internal  and  environmental  intel- ligence  to  test  assumptions.
In  the  case  of  cybersecurity,  security  teams  should  apply  “threat  intelligence,”  which  tells  them  the  intent and capabilities of current, real-world  hackers  who  may  want  to  harm  them.
Gathered  from  a  company’s  own  environ- ment  and  often  supplemented  with  much  broader  environmental  intelligence  from  a  third party, threat intelligence can be applied  to  cybersecurity  technologies  and  human  procedures.
When boards  and management discuss metrics like breach  frequency,  response  time,  and  potential  impact,  it’s  helpful  to  know  if  the  security  team  is  applying  threat  intelligence  to  help  them make their assumptions.
One of the most important defenses against  cyberattack is an informed, vigilant employ- ee population.
Employees and executives are  often  targeted  with  carefully  crafted  emails  designed  to  be  relevant  to  the  employee’s  personal or work life.
One click by a less careful individual  can deploy a cyber weapon into the compa- ny’s  network  and  execute  various  actions  that shut down critical business functions or  steal information and accounts.
81  ¦  CYBER RISK AND THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  The bottom line is that human behavior  is  equally  as  important  as  security  tech- nologies  in  defending  against  the  threat.
An  open dialog in these cases helps employees  and the organization as a whole learn from  mistakes.
It also builds a culture of security  awareness.
Organize  information  security  teams  for   success.
Defending  and  responding  effectively  against cyber adversaries also depends on  manpower  and  expertise.
Technologies  cannot be used to full advantage without  highly skilled people to correlate, analyze,  prioritize,  and  turn  the  data  into  actiona- ble intelligence that can be used to increase  resilience.
A  properly  organized  and  staffed  security  team  needs  people  with  many  different  types  of  expertise  and  skills.
It  requires  people  to  deploy  the  technologies, understand what the threats  are, determine what hackers are doing, fix  system  and  software  vulnerabilities,  and  counter  active  threats.
Although  these  professional  capabilities  are  interdepend- ent,  they  are  not  all  interchangeable,  requiring  different  training  and  certifica- tions.
Information  security  leaders  also  need  the  management  skills  to  put  the  right  governance  processes  and  proce- dures  in  place,  advocate  for  security  requirements,  and  communicate  risk  to  senior management.
Boards  are  encouraged  to  inquire  as  to  whether  the  security  team  has  the  band- width and manpower to be able to respond  and remediate a crisis, as well as to handle  day-to-day  operations.
Security  teams  should be organized to focus on what mat- ters  most—immediate  threats—and  other  resources should be considered where there  are gaps.
Measure effectiveness, not compliance.
It is impossible for a company to know how  effective its security program is against real- world attackers unless it conducts real-world  exercises  to  test  its  defenses.
Compliance  frameworks  can  improve  rigor  in  many  areas  of  cybersecurity,  but  it  is  folly  to  assume  that  following  a  compliance  man- date  (or  even  passing  a  compliance  inspec- tion)  is  commensurate  with  resilience.
No  matter how well architected a security pro- gram is against recommended standards, no  two companies’ environments are alike.
Network  security  testing  emulates  actual  hackers  using  real- life tactics such as phishing to validate how  well  defenses  work  against  simulated  attacks.
By  learning  how  hackers  penetrate  security defenses, companies can determine  actual risk and resource cybersecurity opera- tions accordingly.
Emphasize process as much as technology.
Technology is only half the solution to mak- ing a company resilient.
Take the example  of  recent  high-profi le  cases  in  which  weak- nesses in a supply chain or a business part- ner’s security allowed hackers to access the  parent  company’s  network  and  do  signifi - cant  damage.
Leading  practice  today  is  for  companies  to  insist,  by  contract,  that  their  business  partners  meet  the  same  security  requirements.
However,  what  if  a  business  line  leader  fails to insist on contract requirements in the  interest  of  going  to  market  quickly?
What  happens when business enablement trumps  security  in  the  far  reaches  of  the  business,  where  people  think,  “No  harm  done”?
Adequate checks and balances should be in  place to ensure that IT security and business  procedures are being executed, and policies     DEMYSTIFYING CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY AND REPORTING: HOW BOARDS CAN TEST ASSUMPTIONS   should  hold  relevant  business  leaders  and  employees accountable for implementation.
¦  Summary: A framework for oversight By  the  very  nature  of  being  connected  to  the  Internet,  companies  are  targeted  24/7,  365  days  a  year  by  anonymous,  sophisti- cated  hackers  who  strive  to  steal  from  or  harm the business and its employees.
That  ongoing  challenge  is  taking  place  across  the  entire  enterprise,  not  just  on  the  net- work,  so  it’s  important  to  remember  that  we  all  play  a  role  in  managing  the  risk:  employees,  business  partners,  and  even  board  members.
There  is  no  silver  bullet  piece  of  technology  that  will  eliminate  all  danger,  and  being  resilient  is  just  as  dependent on people and process as it is on  technology.
A  cybersecurity  ‘win’  in  this  environment  is  defi ned  as  how  effectively  and  effi ciently  the  company  fi nds  and  removes threats from its environment and  whether it remains fully operational in the  process.
Cybersecurity  risk  is  an  enterprise  risk,  not  a  function  of  IT.
For  boards  to  provide  reasonable  oversight  they’ll  have  to  under- stand  what  the  company  is  protecting,  inquire  about  how  well  the  company  is  organized to defend those assets, and explore  whether it has the manpower and capabili- ties  to  respond  and  remediate  in  the  event  of  a  breach.
Compliance  is  an  important   element of cybersecurity, but it is a by-product  of a good program, not the measure of effec- tiveness.
Nor is it a guarantee of security, as  illustrated  by  many  recent  high-profi le  breaches  in  which  companies  had  already  met  the  requirements  for  one  compliance  mandate or another.
Many  business  leaders fear that “we’ll never spend enough,”  but  experience  shows  that  a  pragmatic  approach to funding the security program is  to focus on effectiveness and prioritization:   ?
Companies may also want to consider third- party  providers  to  monitor,  correlate,  and  analyze the massive quantity of data that a  mature  security  program  generates.
Armed with an understanding of what a  mature security program looks like and how  it  plays  out  across  the  entire  enterprise,  boards will be better equipped to discuss the  company’s  current  strategy  and  inquire  about assumptions in the metrics.
SecurityRoundtable.org     83  ¦  Cyber risk corporate  structure  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  The CEO’s guide to driving better  security by asking the right questions Palo Alto Networks Inc. – Davis Hake,  Director of Cybersecurity Strategy  I  recently  met  with  a  chief  information  offi cer  (CIO)  whose chief executive offi cer (CEO) had just taken a strik- ing and dramatic interest in cybersecurity.
The  CIO  was  incensed,  because  the  question  would  inevitably  force  him  to  shift  priorities  for  his  already  overworked team to an issue that had little to no effect on  their actual security efforts.
In essence, you need  to familiarize yourself with the risks and relevant people  before an emergency so security teams are not blown in  different directions depending on the new security scare  of the day.
Similarly,  CEOs  cannot  familiarize  themselves  with  cybersecurity narrowly through the lens of a single inci- dent  that  occurs  on  their  network  or  with  one  of  their  competitors.
Cybersecurity is the poster  child for this phenomenon.
Executives know that there is  a  newfound  focus  on  cybersecurity  at  the  boardroom  level—incidents like Target’s 2013 data breach have been  a wake-up call for many—but there is often still a severe  lack  of  understanding  about  the  real  risks  behind  the  headlines.
A  recent  New  York  Stock  Exchange  (NYSE)  and  Veracode survey looking at boardroom attention to cyber- security  found  80  percent  of  participants  said  it  is  dis- cussed in most or every boardroom meeting.
They noted  specifi cally that “responsibility for attacks is being seen as   87  ¦  CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE  a  broader  business  issue,  signaling  a  shift  AWAY  from  the  chief  information  security  offi cer  (CISO)  and  the  IT  security  team.”  Where  is  this  shift  moving  to?
Yet despite this shift in perceived respon- sibility to the executive level, there does not  appear to be the same drive to connect tech- nical teams to the board-level focus on con- cerns  about  cybersecurity  risk.
A  2015  Raytheon  and  Ponemon  Institute  study  of  those with the day-to-day technical respon- sibility  for  cybersecurity,  CIOs,  CISOs,  and  senior  IT  leaders,  found  that  66  percent  of  respondents  believe  senior  leaders  don’t  perceive  cybersecurity  as  a  priority.
What  this  means  is  that  while  CEOs  are  increas- ingly on the hook from their boards for being  savvy  about  cyber  risks,  many  are  not  yet  engaging  with  the  necessary  parts  of  their  organization to address cybersecurity issues.
Our hope is that this guide can prime you  to ask productive questions that drive better  people, processes, and technological change  to  reduce  the  risk  of  successful  breaches  of  your organization.
Cyberthreats  are  not  magic,  hackers  are  not  wizards,  and  the  risks  to  your  spe- cifi c organization from a breach can be man- aged just like any other risks that you make  decisions about every day.
You  want  to  avoid  causing  unnecessary  work,  but  you  are  required  to  participate,  and  often  lead,  the  conversation around addressing cyber risks.
When the U.S. Government began working  with  members  of  the  IT  and  critical  infra- structure  industry  on  a  Cybersecurity  Framework for improving critical infrastruc- ture cybersecurity, a key point that arose was  the need for nontechnical tools that could be  used  at  an  executive  level.
Technical  best  practices have existed in international stand- ards and government agencies for years, but   ¦  88   common problems such as a lack of invest- ment,  absence  of  high-level  strategy,  and  failure to integrate into business operations  still plagued many organizations struggling  to  address  cyberthreats.
Seeing  this  tension  in many of the organizations they were brief- ing on cyberthreats, the U.S. Department of  Homeland  Security  worked  with  current  and  former  executives  to  help  capture  fi ve  simple questions that a CEO could ask his or  her technical team, which would also drive  better security practices.
What  is  the  current  level  and  business  impact  of  cyber  risks  to  our  company?
How is our executive leadership informed  about  the  current  level  and  business  impact of cyber risks to our company?
How  does  our  cybersecurity  program  industry  standards  and  best   apply  practices?
How  many  and  what  types  of  cyber  incidents do we detect in a normal week?
How comprehensive is our cyber incident  response  plan?
The team that coordinated the Cybersecurity  Framework also provided key recommenda- tions to leadership, to align their cyber risk  policies with these questions.
First and fore- most,  it  is  critical  for  CEOs  to  lead  incor- poration of their cyber risks into existing risk  management  efforts.
It seems simple, but with  cybersecurity,  the  default  practice  tends  to  be  for  organizations  to  silo  considerations  about  risks  into  a  separate  category  apart  from  thinking  about  their  valuable  assets.
You have to start by identifying what is most  critical  to  protect  and  work  out  from  there.
The process of aligning your core value with  your top IT concerns is a journey and is not     THE CEO’S GUIDE TO DRIVING BETTER SECURITY BY ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS    something  that  can  be  solved  in  one  lump  investment  or  board  meeting.
Just  like  any  risk  analysis,  it  requires  serious  considera- tion and thought about what is most impor- tant to your core business practices.
Which  brings  me  to  the  second  recom- mendation to come out of the Cybersecurity  Framework effort: don’t begin your journey  alone!
Bring your leadership team, especially  your  CIO,  chief  security  offi cer  (CSO),  and  CISO, into the conversation from the start, to  help determine how your IT priorities match  to  your  business  goals.
Building  a  diverse  team  that  includes  other  leaders,  such  as  your  head  of  human  resources,  will  help  foster  a  culture  that  views  cyberthreats  not  as  “someone  else’s  problem”  but  as  chal- lenges  that  should  be  addressed  and  dealt  with as an entire organization.
For example,  cyber criminals still continue to successfully  use  fake  emails  as  a  primary  method  for  gaining  access  to  a  company’s  network.
Stopping  these  attacks  requires  not  just  a  technical  solution  but  also  strong  training,  which  is  often  the  responsibility  of  human  resources and not your IT security team.
For  example,  if  you  experience  a  cyber  breach  or  accidental  disclosure  of  sensitive  information,  a  diverse  leadership  team  is  incredibly helpful at not just responding to  the  technical  problems  but  also  ensuring  other  areas  such  as  public  image,  legal  ramifi cations, and revenue impact are taken  into  consideration  in  any  mitigation  and  remediation  efforts.
As with normal business operations, you  should  also  be  asking  your  team  to  assist  you  in  day-to-day  requirements  of  your  cybersecurity, such as reviewing IT budgets  and personnel security policies.
None of this  is surprising, and you will fi nd that despite   not having a cybersecurity background, you  will certainly be able to make valuable con- tributions  about  which  cyber  risks  are  acceptable.
Your perspective on these matters  is what makes you core to leading cyberse- curity efforts in your organization.
Finally,  as  with  any  risk  management  effort, you must plan for the best but prepare  for the worst.
There  are  technical  architectures  that  can  prevent  and  limit  damage done by cyberattacks (see Palo Alto  Network’s  other  chapter,  “Designing  for  breach prevention”), but no solution is ever  100 percent.
Developing an incident response  plan  that  is  coordinated  across  your  enter- prise  and  regularly  tested  is  vital  for  even  the  most  well-defended  organizations.
Use  your existing risk management practices and  your leadership team to identify your most  important assets; then plan for what would  happen to your company if those assets were  shut off or inaccessible for a sustained peri- od of time.
There  are  also  excellent  chapters  in  this  book to get you started in setting up an inci- dent  response  plan,  and  there  are  many  good companies that specialize in the sticky  problems of rebuilding your network when  you need to call in the cavalry.
While  risk  management  is  a  strong  approach  to  tackling  the  challenges  of  cybersecurity, the bottom line is that it will  often require some investment in new peo- ple,  processes,  or  technology.
A  common  myth is that security must be a cost center  for every organization.
This view has plagued  IT security experts for years, as their efforts  are viewed as drains on resources that would  otherwise  be  bringing  in  revenue.
But  as  you  start  to  lay  out  cybersecurity  from  a     89  ¦  CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE  risk  management  perspective,  you  will  be  forced  to  identify  your  most  valuable  assets,  pressing  vulnerabilities,  and  core  motivations.
It  is  imperative  that  you recognize these innovations and make  the  right  investments  to  reap  both  the  benefi ts of better security and new business  opportunities.
For example, take a company that wants  to enable its sales staff to securely meet with  customers face to face away from the offi ce  for consultations.
Using mobile devices and  phones  to  access  internal  company  data,  such  as  customer  accounts,  from  the  fi eld  can open serious cyber risks.
In this case you  could ensure that when purchasing a mobile  platform, you also choose a security vendor  that can provide mobile device management  capabilities.
This allows your IT department  to  secure  lost  or  stolen  devices  and  limit  malicious software that could be accidental- ly downloaded by employees (or often their  kids), limiting cyber risks and enabling fl ex- ibility of your sales team.
They are incredibly popular  for their low cost, fl exibility, and availability  across multiple platforms, but they also exist  on servers outside your control and can pre- sent  a  huge  risk  from  users  accidentally  making  company  resources  available  to  external  parties.
There  are  now  innovative  solutions  that  can  manage  these  programs  just like any normal application that lives on  your  network  and  even  block  their  use  for  only malicious purposes.
Cybersecurity  is no different.
Ultimately,  we  must  get to a place where cybersecurity is a nor- mal part of any business’s operational plan.
¦  90   SecurityRoundtable.org  Establishing the structure,  authority, and processes to  create an effective program Coalfi re – Larry Jones, CEO and Rick  Dakin, CEO (2001-2015)  Cybersecurity program oversight is currently an unsettling  process  for  many  C-suites  and  boardrooms.
Establishing  structure,  authority,  and  program  oversight  should  be  aligned to existing management processes and structure for  other critical programs.
However, cybersecurity programs  remain unsettling.
Simply put, cybersecurity programs address a different  type  of  risk.
Typically,  the  risk  that  is  being  addressed  includes sophisticated attacks that are intended to interrupt  operations or steal sensitive data.
Both cases provide  business justifi cation to manage cybersecurity initiatives as  a bet-your-business type of risk management program.
The  connection  between  the  boardroom  and  those  managing the technical infrastructure is critical.
However,  no  board  or  C-Suite  has  the  skills  or  knowledge  of  the  threat  landscape  or  technologies  involved  in  cybersecu- rity  programs  to  fl atten  the  management  structure  for  top  to  bottom  direct  management.
Each  level  of  the  organization  must  participate  in  an  integrated  and  col- laborative  fashion.
The  structure  and  risk  management  responsibilities  have  been  documented  many  times  by  well-respected  cybersecurity  organizations  such  as  the  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in  a  series  of  special  publications.
As a result, this chapter  leverages the lessons learned from those previous engage- ments to provide a condensed but effective approach to   91  ¦  CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE  cyber  risk  management  and  cybersecurity  program creation and oversight.
First, the nature of the threat landscape is  evolving,  while  the  underlying  technology  platforms  that  hold  sensitive  data  are  also  changing.
In  this  fl uid  environment,  man- agement  must  create  a  nimble  program  of  active cyber defenses informed by an itera- tive risk management process.
For the fore- seeable future, cybersecurity program over- sight will not be one that can be reduced to  an  annual  review  process.
Often the primary risks to cyber assets is a  cyberattack.
Unlike other enterprise risks that can be  managed with traditional controls, cybersecu- rity requires the mindset of a warrior.
There is no reason to fear the attack but  there  is  reason  to  be  concerned  about  our  readiness to defend ourselves from the attack  and respond appropriately.”  The most common approach for creating  and maintaining an enterprise cybersecurity  program  follows  a  fi ve-step  risk  manage- ment  process.
The  process  is  iterative  and  constantly  informed  by  new  information.
Cybersecurity has to be  viewed  as  a  process  and  not  an  end  point,  the proverbial marathon versus sprint.
Each  of  the  steps  in  the  process  requires  participation  at  multiple  levels  across  an  organization.
¦  92   FIGURE  Cybersecurity Program  Benchmarks  Adjust  Plan  Respond  Protect  Detect   1.
Plan    i.  Cyber asset inventory and environment   characterization  ii.
Risk assessment and risk management      iii.
Governance and organization structure  i.
Program  control  design,  control   selection, and implementation  strategy     2.
Communications     The rest of the chapter addresses each step of  the  cybersecurity  program  development  process  and  highlights  responsibilities  for  stakeholders throughout the organization.
ESTABLISHING THE STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND PROCESSES TO CREATE AN EFFECTIVE PROGRAM   ¦  Plan Cyber asset inventory and environment characterization In accordance with the principles of Sun Tzu,  “know  thyself.”  When  cybersecurity  pro- grams are managed at only a technical level,  the  focus  of  the  program  is  at  risk  of  being  misdirected.
Sensitive data hosted on an inex- pensive platform may bely the true value to  the organization.
Only senior executives and  business unit managers understand the rela- tive importance of specifi c operations or data.
Simple  cybersecurity  program  designs  often include some level of network and data  segmentation,  encryption,  or  levels  of  access.
However, the IT team will  never  know  how  to  answer  that  question  if  senior management (specifi cally business unit  management)  does  not  specifi cally  provide  guidance  on  the  relative  importance  of  busi- ness functions and their associated systems.
The  new  generation  CIOs  and  CISOs  understand  this  principle  completely,  and  the best of them have structured the operat- ing  environment  and  security  programs  to  focus  on  the  most  important  cyber  assets.
The  most  important  part  of  this  discussion  is,  “Does  every  business  unit  manager  under- stand  what  his  or  her  most  critical  cyber  assets  are  and  where  they  are  deployed?”  Even  if  the  CIO  and  CISO  understand  the  relative  priorities,  senior  executives  cannot  effectively  participate  in  either  cyber  risk  management or cybersecurity program over- sight without fi rst understanding the extent  of the environment being protected.
As a quick warning, many of my clients  have the false expectation that cybersecurity  has become a critical part of the design for  new  or  more  modern  platforms  being  pur- chased from large vendors and hosting pro- viders.
In  many  cases,  unless  deployed  appropriately,  new  cloud  and  mobile  applications  can  actually  decrease  the level of cybersecurity already deployed  on legacy systems.
It is the responsibility of  each  executive  to  fully  defi ne  his  or  her  operating  environment  and  include  critical  third parties in the assessment.
Although lack of cybersecurity integration  by vendors is not universal, we’re seeing some  enlightenment  in  a  few  security-focused  ser- vice providers.
However, it remains a serious  concern for the majority of new system acqui- sition and support processes, and cybersecurity  typically shifts to an add-on feature after pro- curement  of  a  major  new  system  in  many  cases.
In short, the process of identifying criti- cal cyber assets and the systems that support  those assets will remain a key part of the cyber- security  program  oversight  function  for  the  long  term.
The  process  of  ‘knowing  thyself’  has been expanded to knowing your partners  and  vendors  and  where  your  sensitive  data  has been shared or managed by third parties.
Risk assessment and risk management strategy After a solid understanding of the battlefi eld  is  established  and  executives  appreciate  the  critical  cyber  assets  being  protected,  an  assessment  of  risk  to  those  cyber  assets  is  critical to the design of the cybersecurity pro- gram.
The  ability  to  adjust  the  program  to  meet the evolving threat landscape and tech- nology  architecture  shifts  is  an  important  component of organizational security matu- rity.
Responsibilities for conducting an effec- tive cyber risk assessment are distributed at  three levels, as shown in Figure 2.
93  ¦  CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE  FIGURE  Cyber Risk Organizational Structure  and Responsibilities   TIER 1: Executive Leadership  (cid:129)  Corporate strategy (cid:129)  Policy  (cid:129)  Results of     monitoring (cid:129)  Feedback   TIER 2: Business  Management  (cid:129)  Actionable policy   and procedures (cid:129)  Guidance and   constraints  (cid:129)  Results of    monitoring (cid:129)  Feedback   TIER 3: Systems  Management  The  primary  objective  for  a  risk  assess- ment  is  to  drive  selection  of  adequate  and  rational  controls  and  then  assign  responsi- bilities to manage those controls.
During the  process  the  environment  will  be  character- ized to bring context and the existing system  vulnerabilities,  and  weaknesses  will  be  evaluated  to  select  controls  to  offset  the  probability of compromise during an attack.
A  comprehensive  cybersecurity  program  addresses  administrative,  physical,  and  technical controls as an integrated suite.
Once the inherent threats and vulnerabili- ties are understood within the context of the  impact they could have on the organization,  its  clients,  and  partners,  senior  executives  must approve the risk management strategy.
Cost, continuity of operations,  or other concerns may drive the formation of  the cybersecurity program to mitigate what  is  reasonable  and  accept  the  residual  risk.
Cybersecurity  insurance  is  becoming  an   ¦  94   increasingly  popular  means  of  transferring  risk  but  comes  with  the  requirement  that  you  understand  risk  in  ways  that  may  not  have been previously considered.
It is impor- tant that the business units and security staff  are  able  to  communicate  the  constraints  as  well  as  the  risk  mitigation  alternatives  for  senior  executives  to  make  reasonable  deci- sions on risk management strategies.
Governance and organization structure The risk assessment management duties and  responsibilities  are  typically  allocated  in  accordance with Table 1.
¦  Protect Program design and implementation The outcome for any cybersecurity program  is  the  expectation  that  an  organization  can  defend its critical cyber assets from irrepara- ble  damage  resulting  from  a  cyberattack.
The  impact  of  cyberattack  is  different  for  every organization.
Approve risk   Management strategy  ?
Develop a justifi ed risk   management strategy  ?
Identify all required  users of systems or  delegates to receive data  on a “need to know”  basis  Systems Management  ?
Recommend technical  and physical controls  ?
Estimate the impact on  systems and operations  from a fi nancial,  legal, and regulatory  perspective  Although security programs are different  for every company, the principles for devel- oping the program are fairly consistent.
NIST  Special  Publication  800-53  has  done  a  good  job in describing the selection of controls for  high-,  medium-,  and  low-level  impacts.
Every organization needs access controls, but  only  those  that  result  in  national  security  impact are realistic candidates for deploying  the high-level version of that control.
Many  executives  are  “sold”  a  package  of  controls  because  they  are  used  by  the  NSA,  but  the  question  to  ask  is,  “How  does  the  NSA  mission relate to our operations?”  As  discussed  in  the  risk  assessment  seg- ment,  executives  have  to  defi ne  their  risk  appetite.
This is hard during the early days  of  cybersecurity  program  development  because most of the C-suites have an inher- ently low risk appetite and do not yet under- stand  the  impact  of  lowering  the  threshold  for control selection.
As a result, cybersecu- rity programs are often a work in process for  several years.
the  security  solutions  selected.
Rather,  the  magic is in the ability of the organization to  manage  those  solutions  to  mitigate  risks.
Because  the  security  skills  available  in  the  industry today are low and growing increas- ingly rare, companies should expect to spend  a  disproportionate  amount  of  training  dol- lars on cybersecurity.
Maintenance Anyone working in forensic response will tell  you that system compromise and data breach  are  rarely  the  result  of  some  sophisticated  attack that no one has ever been seen before.
Cross- site  scripting,  shell  or  SQL  injection,  shared  administrator accounts, lack of patching, and  other  standard  security  hygiene  issues  are  normally  the  culprits.
There  are  two  signifi - cant  operations  that  go  dramatically  under- funded  in  most  organizations:  maintenance  of systems and security controls, which leaves  organizations vulnerable to attack.
Training The  best  cybersecurity  programs  are  the  ones  that  staff  and  partners  will  actually  execute.
For  years,  senior  executives  did  not  have to participate in cybersecurity program     95  ¦  CYBER RISK CORPORATE STRUCTURE  oversight,  because  a  combination  of  fi re- walls,  malware  protection,  and  light  access  controls  were  adequate  to  defend  against  previous  generations  of  relatively  static  cyberattacks.
Cybersecurity programs have moved from  a period of static defenses to active defenses,  and we must become more nimble to success- fully  protect  critical  systems  and  sensitive  data.
The sec- ond  area  is  to  develop  cybersecurity  pro- grams  with  a  much  higher  focus  on  threat  intelligence,  monitoring,  and  alerting.
This  requires new security solutions and specially  trained  security  professionals.
The  old  line  of fi rewalls, malware protection, and access  controls  are  still  required,  but  much  more  active  system  patching,  vulnerability  man- agement,  and  monitoring  are  driving  mod- ern security programs.
To  avoid  the  perception  of  negligence,  senior  executives  often  reinforce  old  line  security controls that are audited for regula- tory compliance.
However, focusing only on  compliance will not secure an organization.
Just  like  a  good  boxer  needs  to  be  able  to  take  a  punch  and  stay  in  the  ring,  companies  today  must  be  able  to  absorb  a  cyber punch and keep operating while at the  same time mitigating and recovering.
Cybersecurity programs must alert  the  technology  teams  and  business  units  to  respond  appropriately.
¦  Respond Response capabilities vary after discovery of a  cybersecurity incident, and organizations are  typically faced with two unappealing options:   1.
The most immediate, and some say rational,  response  is  to  “pull  up  the  drawbridge”  to  eliminate  whatever  access  hackers  have.
On the other hand, if a company decides to  take option two, to play it low-key and con- tinue with business as usual to determine the  scope  of  the  problem,  the  organization  can  determine what systems have been compro- mised,  what  new  privileged  accounts  have  been created, and what back doors may exist.
This will give the company a better chance of  long-term  success  in  eliminating  the  breach  and repairing lost or damaged information.
Continuous  monitoring  and  reporting  will  enable  all  three  tiers  of  responsibility  to  constantly  adjust  the  program  and  inform  the  other  tiers of actions.
¦  Summary Effective  cybersecurity  program  develop- ment  and  oversight  requires  executives  to  implement  and  manage  a  distributed  process at three levels within an organiza- tion:  executive  level;  business  unit  level;  and operational level (Table 2).
ESTABLISHING THE STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND PROCESSES TO CREATE AN EFFECTIVE PROGRAM   Levels of Authority and Responsibility  Executive  Business Unit  Systems Management  TABLE  Plan   ?
Enforce controls  ?
Design and   manage physical  and logical  controls  controls   ?
Develop an   architecture to  integrate controls  ?
Design, deploy, and   manage technical  controls   ?
Operate system and   control monitoring   ?
Approve   cybersecurity  program strategy   ?
Approve standards   and metrics for  control oversight  ?
Receive periodic  threat briefi ngs  and controls  effectiveness  reports   ?
Receive periodic   education on  changes to the  threat landscape  and emerging  controls   ?
Deploy updated   administrative  and physical  controls  for control  enhancements  If  Sun  Tzu  lived  today,  he  would  clearly  see  the  nature  of  current  cybersecurity  pro- grams and responsibilities and recognize that  criticality of executive level management.
We   have to take a warrior’s attitude in develop- ing strategies and programs to be successful  in  combatting  the  cybersecurity  challenges  we face today.
SecurityRoundtable.org     97  ¦  Cybersecurity legal and  regulatory considerations  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  Securing privacy and profi t in the era  of hyperconnectivity and big data Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive Vice  President; Dean Forbes, Senior Associate; Agatha  O'Malley, Senior Associate; Jaqueline Cooney,  Lead Associate; and Waiching Wong, Associate  Companies  increasingly  use  consumer  data,  including  personal information, to stay competitive; this includes the  capability to analyze their customers’ demographics and  buying  habits,  predict  future  behaviors  and  business  trends, and collect and sell data to third-parties.
Consumers’  willingness to share their data centers on trust, however,  and 91% of adults believe that they have lost control over  how their personal information is collected and used (2014  Pew  Research  Center).
So  how  do  companies  effectively  manage  consumer  data  while  simultaneously  building  trust?
It has been said that you cannot have good privacy  without good security.
A fi rst step is to build an effective  security  program  while  also  better  understanding  what  privacy means and how it can be a strategic business ena- bler in our era of hyper-connectivity and “big data”.
This  has  created  the   91%  of adults “agree” or “strongly agree” that consumers have lost control over how their  personal information is collected and used by  companies  101  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  data  economy—the  exchange  of  digitized  information  for  the  purpose  of  creating  insights and value.
Companies are building  entire  businesses  around  consumer  infor- mation,  including  building  data-driven  products and monetizing data streams.
This  is  a  supply-driven  push  made  possible  by  widespread  digitization,  ubiquitous  data  storage, powerful analytics, mobile technol- ogy  that  feeds  ever  more  information  into  the system, and the Internet of Things.
The  data  economy  goes  beyond  the  tech  industry.
The most competitive  companies  will  sift  through  this  data  for  trends and then, through a joint venture, sell  the  information  to  the  vendors  who  stock  their shelves.
Consumer product makers are  often willing to purchase this data in order to  make  more  informed  decisions  about  prod- uct placement, marketing, and branding.
They  do  this every time they “check in” to a location  through a mobile app, when they use a loy- alty card, when they purchase items online,  and  when  they  are  tracked  through  their  Internet searches.
Companies gain consum- ers’  trust  and  confi dence  through  transpar- ency  about  the  personal  information  that  they  gather,  providing  consumers  control  over  uses  and  sharing  of  such  information,  and offer fair value in return.
However,  an  important  central  concept regarding privacy recurs, which is,  the appropriate collection, use, and sharing  of personal information to accomplish busi- ness  tasks.
Personal  information  comes  in  variations  such as: (1) self-reported data, or information  people  volunteer  about  themselves,  such  as  their email addresses, work and educational  history,  and  age  and  gender;  (2)  digital  exhaust, such as location data and browsing  history, which is created when using mobile  devices,  web  services,  or  other  connected  technologies;  and  (3)  profi ling  data,  or  per- sonal profi les used to make predictions about  individuals’  interests  and  behaviors,  which  are derived by combining self-reported, digi- tal  exhaust,  and  other  data.
However,  that  same  information  is  what  consumers  value the most and seek to protect.
¦  102     SECURING PRIVACY AND PROFIT IN THE ERA OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY AND BIG DATA    Privacy is very often confl ated with security.
While privacy is about the appropriate collec- tion, use, and sharing of personal information, security is about protecting such information  from loss, or unintended or unauthorized access, use, or sharing.
¦   Privacy and security intersect through   breaches  Although privacy and security are two sepa- rate  concepts,  the  importance  of  these  two  ideas intersect for the consumer if personal  information  is  not  safeguarded.
Large-scale  security  breaches,  such  as  the  recent  theft  of  credit  card  information  of  56  million  Home  Depot  consumers  (2015)  and  40  million  Target  shoppers  (2013),  pro- vide consumers with plenty to worry about.
Breach-weary consumers need to know who  to  trust  with  their  personal  information,  to  ensure that only the company that they pro- vided  the  information  to  can  use  it.
Risk  management  for  data  privacy  and  security  of  that  data  should  guard  against  external  malicious breaches and inadvertent internal  breaches and third-party partner breaches.
¦   Privacy is linked to trust—differentiate   with it  Trust, and the data that it allows companies  to have access to, is a critical strategic asset.
Learning  from  its  issues  with  the  lack  of  security  on  iCloud, Apple  now  markets  all  of the privacy features of their products and  apps.
For  the  last  few  years,  the  Electronic  Frontier Foundation has published the “Who  Has  Your  Back”  list—highlighting  compa- nies with strong privacy best practices, par- ticularly  regarding  disclosure  of  consumer  information to the government.
Although international accords  often  serve  as  the  basis  of  national  laws  and policy frameworks,1 the local variations  complicate  compliance.
For  example,  the  May  2014  ruling  of  the  European  Court  of  Justice  on  the  “right  to  be  forgotten”  set  a  precedent  for  removing  information  from  search  results  that  are  deemed  to  be  no  longer relevant or not in the public interest  by  affi rming  a  ruling  by  the  Spanish  Data  Protection Agency.
Issues     103  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  remain, such as the possibility of removing  links  from  Google.com  as  well  as  from  country-specifi c search engines.
Compliance with established laws in the  U.S. is often topic- and industry-specifi c. For  example, Congress has passed laws prohib- iting  the  disclosure  of  medical  information  (the  Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act),  educational  records  (the Buckley Amendment), and video-store  rentals (a law passed in response to revela- tions  about  Robert  Bork’s  rentals  when  he  was nominated to the Supreme Court).4  Growing data = growing target for hackers As  data  availability  increases,  the  attractive- ness of datasets for hackers increases as well.
Just a few of the con- fi rmed  cyberattacks  that  targeted  consumer  information  in  2014  include:  eBay,  Montana  Health  Department,  P.F.
Chang’s,  Evernote,  Feedly, and Domino’s Pizza.5   Beyond personal information  Personal  information  (PI)  is  described  in  privacy  and  information  security  circles  as  information that can be used on its own or  with other information to identify, contact or  locate a single person, or to identify an indi- vidual  in  context.
Appropriate privacy  policies  are  needed  internally,  this  means  building  privacy  considerations  into  busi- ness  operations  and  expected  employee   ¦  104   conduct, along with a clearly defi ned means  of  enforcement.
Some  of  the  ways  to  do  this  include  the  following.
No company has a  perfect  solution,  but  many  organizations  have  come  closer.
Facebook  has  recently  rewritten  its  privacy  policy  for  simplicity  and  included  step-by-step  directions  for  users.8  To  increase  trust,  privacy  policies  should clearly state the following:   1.  the  personal  information  that  you  will   collect   2.  why  data  is  collected  and  how  it  will   be used and shared   3.  how you will protect the data  4.  explanation of consumer benefi t from the  collection,  use,  sharing,  and  analysis  of  their data.
To  ensure  that  the  data is used in the ways stated, develop clear  internal  data  use  and  retention  guidelines  across  the  entire  enterprise,  limit  internal  access  to  databases,  create  a  procedure  for  cyberattacks, and link it directly to the con- sumer privacy policy.
Go “privacy by design” The concept of “privacy by design” is inte- grating  and  promoting  privacy  require- ments  and/or  best  practices  into  systems,  services,  products,  and  business  processes  at  the  planning,  design,  development,  and     SECURING PRIVACY AND PROFIT IN THE ERA OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY AND BIG DATA    implementation stages, to ensure that busi- nesses  meets  their  customer  and  employee  privacy expectations, and policy and regula- tory requirements.
The approach is a market  differentiator  that  is  intended  to  reduce  privacy  and  security  risks  and  cost  by  embedding  relevant  company  policies  into  such  designs.
As  such,  privacy  settings  are  automatically  applied  to  devices  and  ser- vices.
Privacy  by  design  and  default  is  recognized  by  the  U.S.  Federal  Trade  Commission as a recommended practice for  protecting online privacy, and is considered  for inclusion in the European Union’s Data  Protection  Regulation,  and  was  developed  by  an  Ontario  Information  and  Privacy  Commissioner.
Communicate your good work Privacy policies and actions are more than  legal  disclosure;  they  are  marketing  tools.
The Alliance  of Automobile Manufacturers, representing  companies such as Chrysler, Ford, General  Motors, and Toyota, publicly pledged more  transparency  about  how  they  will  safe- guard data generated by autonomous vehi- cle  technologies.
Many  groups  have  pub- lished  data  principles  that  communicate  how  data  is  gathered,  protected,  and  shared.9  ¦   Conclusion Our  current  data  economy  brings  exciting  opportunities  for  companies  to  grow  by  enhancing their products and services.
These  innovations rely on consumers to trust your  organization with their personal information.
Building  consumer  trust  includes  keeping  information safe from hackers, creating easy- to-understand  consumer-facing  policies,  and  applying  the  principle  of  “privacy  by  default”.
Finally,  communicating  your  good  work  to  consumers  will  elevate  the  profi le of your organization as a trusted part- ner, and pave the way for future gains.
SecurityRoundtable.org     105  ¦  Oversight of compliance  and control responsibilities Data Risk Solutions: BuckleySandler LLP &  Treliant Risk Advisors LLC – Elizabeth McGinn,  Partner; Rena Mears, Managing Director; Stephen  Ruckman, Senior Associate; Tihomir Yankov,  Associate; and Daniel Goldstein, Senior Director  For too long, cybersecurity has been considered the realm  of  the  Information  Technology  (IT)  Department,  with  corporate executives assuming that the goal of cybersecu- rity is simply to make sure IT is secure enough to allow  the  company  to  use  data  reliably  to  do  its  business.
The collection, analysis, and sale of rich data about one’s  products  and  customers  inform  decision-making  and  business  strategy  and  provide  a  key  revenue  generator  for many companies.
Data’s  value  to  cyber  criminals  also  has  the  attention of federal and state regulators concerned with  consumer privacy and safety, posing new legal and com- pliance challenges.
This is why companies can no longer afford to approach  the  oversight  of  cybersecurity  as  an  IT  issue.
Certainly,  a  secured IT infrastructure is crucial and an important fi rst  line  of  defense.
However,  the  enterprise  risk  created  by  cyberthreats  requires  a  holistic  approach  that  considers  the management of an entire array of impacts—from rep- utational to regulatory to fi nancial—that transcend core IT  competencies  and  functions.
Because  securing  today’s  data is central to securing the company’s future, effective   107  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  oversight  of  cybersecurity  compliance  and  controls requires leadership from the C-suite  and the boardroom.
For  a  company’s  cybersecurity  com- pliance and control programs to be effective,  efforts must be structured in ways that ensure  the board and senior management, including  the C-suite, work together to achieve its risk  objectives.
Each  has  distinct  cybersecurity  responsibilities:  senior  management  is  responsible  for  determining  relevant  cyber- related risks and implementing a compliance  program  that  incorporates  appropriate  pro- cesses and controls to mitigate them, whereas  the  board  is  responsible  for  overseeing  the  risk identifi cation process and independently  evaluating whether the program is designed,  implemented,  and  operating  effectively  to  meet the company’s cybersecurity risk miti- gation objectives.
Meeting these responsibili- ties  well  requires  a  formalized  integrated  approach  to  cybersecurity  risk  evaluation,  defi ned roles and responsibilities, implemen- tation of a program that is supported by the  board, clearly articulated by the C-suite, and  effectively  implemented  by  operational  resources.
Disconnect  between  the  board,  C-suite,  and  operations  poses  as  much  of  a  challenge  to  corporate  cybersecurity  as  cyberthreats themselves.
¦   Cybersecurity oversight is risk management   oversight  To understand why coordinated C-suite and  board oversight of cybersecurity is essential,  one  must  understand  cybersecurity  as  a  means of managing and responding to cor- porate risk.
The purpose of risk management  in  general  is  to  identify  and  mitigate  the  risks a company faces to a level acceptable to  the enterprise as determined by the board, a  level known as a company’s “risk appetite.”  The  strategies  and  objectives  for  managing  risks  and  responding  to  threats  are  articu- lated  in  the  policies,  procedures,  and  con- trols of the organization and are the respon- sibility of senior management.
Data  risk   ¦  108   encompasses the risks of fi nancial loss; busi- ness or operational disruption; loss or com- promise of assets and information; failure to  comply with legal, regulatory, or contractual  requirements; or damage to the reputation of  an organization because of the unauthorized  access  to  or  exploitation  of  data  assets.
Cybersecurity is the protection of data assets  from  unauthorized  electronic  access  or  exploitation  through  processes  designed to prevent, detect, and respond to  these risks.1 Effective oversight of cybersecu- rity  is  therefore  essential  to  a  company’s  oversight of risk management.
risks   Two  core  components  of  the  company’s  cybersecurity  program  must  be  overseen  at  the  highest  levels  of  management:  compli- ance  and  controls.
Compliance  here  means  the  company’s  program  for  ensuring  actual  adherence  to  internal  cybersecurity  policies  as well as external privacy and data protec- tion laws and regulations in the jurisdictions  where the company operates.
Controls mean  the  company’s  systems  and  processes  for  protecting  its  data  infrastructure  and  carry- ing out incident response.
These components  should  be  overseen  actively  to  confi rm  that  compliance  and  controls  are  going  beyond  mechanical application of generic cybersecu- rity  rules  and  standards,  which  may  just  establish  a  regulatory  fl oor  for  corporate  practices, not a set of industry-leading prac- tices,  and  which  may  not  be  appropriate  or  relevant to the threat landscape and unique  regulatory  requirements  for  the  company’s  industry.
Moreover,  even  industry-leading  practices quickly may become dated, because  regulators’ views on “reasonable” cybersecu- rity are changing all the time.2 The legal risks  from  inattentive  oversight  are  limited  only  by  plaintiffs’  imagination  and  regulators’  zeal, and the practical risks are limited only  by hackers’ ambition and creativity.
From a risk management perspective, the  key  inquiry  revolves  around  the  value  of  each  data  asset.
For  example,  data  assets  whose  business  usefulness  has  long  passed  may still be rich in information that may be  embarrassing to the organization if released  publicly.
So in a way, cybersecurity risks are   partially  an  extension  of  data  retention  risks,  for  what  the  organization  does  not  have (and has no obligation to keep) cannot  be hacked.
Thus, the board and senior management  must approach the oversight of cybersecuri- ty  compliance  and  control  from  a  broader  risk  management  vantage  point:  one  that  weighs the value of the data as an asset class  to  the  organization,  the  value  that  may  be  assigned by the threat actors who may seek  the asset, and the broader impact and costs— including but not limited to legal and com- pliance costs—stemming from the potential  compromise of data.
In  this  vein,  perhaps  the  board’s  most  critical  inquiry  to  senior  management  is  whether the organization has adopted suffi - cient  processes  to  inventory  and  value  its  various  data  assets.
From  a  cybersecurity  perspective,  senior  management  should  then  weigh  under  what  circumstances,  through  what  channels,  and  on  what  plat- forms the organization’s most critically val- ued data assets should be made accessible.
¦   Board of directors’ role in oversight   of compliance and controls  Too  often,  boards  have  exercised  limited  oversight  of  cybersecurity,  yet  monitoring  the management of data risk associated with  cybersecurity is part of the board’s fi duciary  duty  to  the  corporation.
The  time  for  the  board to begin to play an oversight role is not  the  moment  when  data  actually  are  put  at  risk, through a breach or corporate theft; the  board  must  build  cybersecurity  oversight  into  its  general  strategy  for  overseeing  risk  management from day one.
Managing  the  risks  associated  with  cybersecurity  compliance  and  control  involves determining one’s risk appetite in a  variety of areas and requires senior manage- ment  to  make  fundamental  judgment  calls  about the design of the control environment,  the  scope  and  depth  of  the  compliance  program,  and  the  resource  allocation  for  each.
The  board  must  be  well  informed  of  how  the  corporate  leadership  is  managing  these risks and able to assess the adequacy     OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES     of  the  organization’s  risk  management  efforts.
The board also has to be sure to engage in  oversight  of  cybersecurity  compliance  and  controls at all phases of the company’s data  risk management “lifecycle.” See Figure 1.
The lifecycle involves, fi rst, identifi cation— looking  at  the  company’s  cybersecurity  risk  profi le,  identifying  the  key  data  assets  that  have  to  be  protected  (the  “crown  jewels”),  and  determining  the  applicable  laws  and  regulations  governing  their  protection;  next,  implementation—creating  and  design  and  implementing operational controls and com- pliance processes to manage the risks to those  data  assets;  next,  monitoring—actively  over- seeing the compliance processes and controls;  next, evaluation—evaluating the effectiveness  and management of the controls and compli- ance  processes  implemented;  and  fi nally  reporting and reassessment—documenting how  the  controls  and  compliance  processes  are  working,  and  reassessing  to  the  extent  that  there are gaps.
The last phase of the lifecycle  involves internal reporting on capabilities to  respond  to  threats,  external  reporting  on  those capabilities to stakeholders (e.g., SOC 2  reporting),  and  adjusting  management  to  respond  to  internal  drivers  (e.g.,  business  changes)  and  external  drivers  (e.g.,  con- stantly  evolving  regulatory  requirements  and  guidance).
The  oversight  and  compliance  need  not  rest on the entire board—a standing commit- tee comprising knowledgeable board mem- bers,  armed  with  outside  expertise  where  appropriate,  often  can  provide  a  more  focused  and  better  informed  oversight.
¦   Building blocks of effective oversight   of cybersecurity compliance  An organization’s cybersecurity compliance  efforts  must  support  the  company’s  busi- ness units and management in their efforts     109  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  FIGURE  Data risk management lifecycle  Report  &  Reassess  Identify  Evaluate  Design  &  Implement  Monitor  to  achieve  compliance  with  government  rules and regulations as well as the organi- zation’s internal policies and procedures by  (1)  identifying  risks;  (2)  preventing  risks  through  the  design  and  implementation  of  controls; (3) monitoring and reporting on the  effectiveness of those controls; (4) resolving  compliance  diffi culties  as  they  occur;  and  (5) advising and training.3  There  are  several  steps  the  board  and  C-suite  should  take  to  provide  effective  oversight  of  the  cybersecurity  compliance  program’s execution of all of these functions.
First and most important, the C-suite should  implement  an  enterprise-wide  approach  to  compliance risk management.
As part of this  approach,  the  organization  should  create  a  formalized Cybersecurity Risk Management  Plan  that  is  reviewed  by  the  board.
If  the  Plan is developed internally by the corporate  leadership,  the  board  should  consider   obtaining outside review for defi ciencies or  improvements.
A  mechanism  for  periodic  updates  to  the  Plan  should  be  included  in  the  Plan;  many  companies  get  into  trouble  with  regulators  for  failing  to  update  their  cybersecurity  approach  as  their  business  model changes or as regulations or enforce- ment strategies change.
If the company is operating in the United  States, the Plan must be neither aspiration- al  nor  hyper-specifi c.  An  aspirational  plan—one that sets out where the organiza- tion envisions its cybersecurity program to  be at some point in the future—may end up  causing the company to look like it is fall- ing  short  if  regulators  come  calling.
In  short,  the  Cybersecurity  Risk  Management  Plan  should  match  what  the  company actually does.
¦  110   Second,  the  C-suite  should  extend  the  enterprise-wide  approach  to  compliance  risk  management  to  the  company’s  entire  ecosystem—its vendors and other third-party  partners (e.g., cloud services providers, out- side  data  processors).
This  means  ensuring  that oversight is robust for the corporate vet- ting  of  cybersecurity  practices  at  third  par- ties  and  that  the  contractual  relationships  with third parties allow for monitoring and  oversight.
Many  technological  innovations  are leading companies to outsource aspects  of  their  business  involving  data,  but  this  comes with risks of the partners not securing  data to the degree the company is.
Third,  the  C-suite  should  ensure—and  the  board  should  monitor—the  independ- ence  of  the  cybersecurity  compliance  team  from  the  company’s  IT  and  business  units.
Given silos that frequently develop around  the compliance, IT, and business teams, the  C-suite ought to ensure that the compliance  team  has  the  resources  and  skills  to  inde- pendently  evaluate  the  suffi ciency  of  the  company’s  cybersecurity  program.
If  the  compliance team is not equipped to under- stand what technological steps the IT team is  or should be taking to advance the organiza- tion’s cybersecurity, and so defers entirely to  their judgment, it may fail to apprehend the  compliance  implications  of  the  steps  ulti- mately taken.
For  example,  if  a  new  business  line  involves  collection  of  new  pieces  of  customer  data,  failure  to  ensure  that  data  are  properly  secured and kept private from the start cre- ates  compliance  risks.
This  can  be  achieved  through     OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES     well-developed monitoring and assessment  processes  that  encourage  timely  internal  communication  of  potential  risks  to  the  compliance team.
Fourth, consistent with the risk manage- ment lifecycle, the C-suite should make sure  it has effective means to test compliance in  practice and communicate the results to the  board.
It is critical for updates to cybersecu- rity compliance policies to translate actually  into updated implementation, and the board  must  be  able  to  see—and  where  needed  spur—this  implementation.
The  C-suite  also  has  to  be  able  to  test  to  see  that  cybersecurity  compliance  is  taking root across the company’s operations  and  prevent  ‘siloing’  within  business  lines  or cost centers.
Fifth  and  fi nally,  the  board  should  make  cybersecurity  compliance  a  priority,  plain  and simple.
None of the above measures will  be  prioritized  at  the  senior  management  level  and  below  unless  they  are  also  the  board’s priority.
¦   Building blocks of effective oversight   of cybersecurity controls  Board and C-suite oversight of cybersecurity  controls  relates  to  the  control  of  associated  enterprise  risks:  legal,  fi nancial,  regulatory,  and  reputational,  to  name  a  few.
None  of  these risks can be fully avoided, but effective  controls  can  reduce  their  impact  on  the  organization,  and  effective  oversight  can  ensure that these controls are thorough.
One  step  a  board  can  take  to  provide  effective oversight of cybersecurity controls  is  to  ensure  that  the  controls  implemented  by the C-suite contain prevention, detection,  and  rapid  remediation  components.
Many  companies  focus  on  prevention  and  detec- tion,  but  not  remediation,  and  then  are  caught  off  guard  when  they  learn  of  an  intrusion  requiring  immediate  remediation  that  went  undetected.
Prevention  measures  include data inventorying, data loss preven- tion planning, strong perimeter and internal  defenses, and processes for timely patching  core software to plug security holes.
Many of  these are IT measures, but prevention is not     111  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  limited to IT and includes building a corpo- rate culture that is mindful of data risk, as is  discussed more below.
Detection  measures  include  analysis  of  operational  data  and  anomaly  detection  as  well as systems for logging, monitoring, and  testing data moving into and out of the corpo- rate IT environment and across various devic- es  (e.g.,  from  computer  to  cloud  service  or  external  storage  devices),  where  legally  per- missible.
Rapid remediation measures include  incident  response  plans  that  are  rehearsed,  implementation  of  forensic  recovery  tools,  and  measures  to  quickly  restore  failed  sys- tems  from  back-ups.
In line with the previous point, a key step  the C-suite should take is to oversee lines of  communication  among  the  various  parts  of  the company that either manage or make use  of the company’s cybersecurity controls.
If a  business line is experiencing occasional bugs  in  its  online  customer  order  processing,  for  example, and IT is not informed of the issue  in a timely manner, malware may go unde- tected.
If an employee with database access  quits and HR does not timely inform IT, then  user credentials may remain active long after  they should.
Another key step the C-suite can take is to  prioritize regular training of employees—at  a  minimum  annually—on  cybersecurity  threats and how to avoid them.
A surprising  number  of  threats  can  be  thwarted  by  employee  education  about  suspicious  emails, strong password practices, and cau- tious  use  of  personal  devices.
Conversely, no matter how strong a com- pany’s  cybersecurity  controls,  it  only  takes  one  employee  mistake  to  expose  sensitive  company data.
¦  112   As with cybersecurity compliance, for the  above measures to be prioritized, they must  be  a  board  priority.
In  this  vein,  the  board  should  check  to  see  that  cybersecurity  con- trols are appropriately funded; none of these  controls can be prioritized without adequate  funding.
¦   Implementation challenges Even the best designed data security initia- tives are prone to failure if not implemented  correctly.
A common problem that can occur  even  after  apparently  successful  program  implementation  is  a  disconnect  between  appropriately  drafted  policies  and  proce- dures  on  the  one  hand,  and  operational  practices  and  technology  infrastructure  on  the  other  (in-house  and  third  party-man- aged), and a failure of the board to notice.
Cybersecurity  policies  and  procedures  are effective only if they are tailored to the  company’s  unique  business  environment,  applicable  regulatory  requirements,  and  known  security  risks.
However,  too  often,  boards  and  C-suite  leadership  oversee  the  development  and  adoption  of  boilerplate  policies and procedures that, although per- haps built on generally appropriate founda- tions, are either insuffi ciently customized or  implemented inappropriately.
The resulting  disconnects may lead not only to damaging  data breaches and unauthorized disclosure  of personal information but also to scrutiny  from regulators and actions from the plain- tiffs’  bar.
For  example,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission (FTC) currently views the dis- connects  between  cybersecurity  policies  and procedures and their actual implemen- tation as unfair or deceptive trade practices  under Section 5 of the FTC Act, and this is a  trend  that  senior  executives  should  expect  to continue.
It is critical to the success of a cybersecu- rity  program  that  the  operational  uptake  of—and  ongoing  adherence  to—program  requirements  are  measured  effectively.
Monitoring of the program not only enables  effective reporting up to the board but also,  more  importantly,  identifi es  vulnerabilities  in  the  program  and  areas  for  improved   security.
Although  evaluating  the  effective- ness  of  a  cybersecurity  program  would  appear  to  be  a  core  component  of  any  suc- cessful implementation, many organizations  fail  to  adequately  address  this  need,  often  leading  to  exploited  weaknesses,  data  breaches, and programmatic failure.
Programmatic  metrics  measure  the progress of various organizational com- ponents  of  the  information  protection  pro- gram, such as overall program development,  implementation,  and  maintenance  (e.g.,  cybersecurity  policies  are  updated  to  meet  new  regulatory  requirements).
Operational  metrics measure the performance of (as the  name  implies)  various  operational  compo- nents of the information protection program;  the  number  of  cybersecurity  incidents  per  reporting  period  is  an  excellent  example.
And  compliance  metrics  measure  individu- als’ compliance with program requirements.
Such  metrics  may  measure,  for  example,  whether  employees  are  observing  required  data security protocols when sending sensi- tive  customer  information  to  a  third  party  for  processing.
Regardless of whether your organization  is seeking to measure programmatic, opera- tional, or compliance aspects of your cyber- security  program,  the  metrics  that  you  design must be clearly defi ned and meaning- ful  and  measure  progress  against  a  clearly  stated  objective.
A  properly  implemented  metrics  program  helps  leadership  ascertain  initial  uptake  and  improve  the  compliance  with—and performance of—a well-designed  cybersecurity program.
Another  challenge  for  effective  imple- mentation  of  cybersecurity  compliance  and  controls—and one that must be closely mon- itored  by  the  board—is  resource  allocation.
The  recognition  of  data  as  a  highly  valued     OVERSIGHT OF COMPLIANCE AND CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES     business asset is clearly established; its value  is verifi ed on a daily basis by those who seek  to  gain  access  to  business  networks  and  view, remove, or otherwise exploit the data  residing there.
However, resources allocated  to cybersecurity are still frequently an IT line  item,  rather  than  an  enterprise-wide  issue.
Businesses operating in this environment of  perpetually  evolving  digital  risks  must  rec- ognize that data security is no longer a cost  of doing business; it is a core component of  remaining  in  business.
The  budgeting process has to enable the compa- ny to do more than get the right people and  processes  in  place  but  also  to  implement  technology that truly addresses the security  needs  of  the  organization.
This  process  requires  commitment  from  the  C-suite  and  oversight from a board that understands the  importance of cybersecurity.
Cybersecurity  budgeting  also  must  include  dedicated  resources  for  training  of  personnel.
As mentioned above, the human  element is frequently the weakest link in an  otherwise solid data security program.
Staff  must  have  the  resources  they  need  to  be  trained  not  only  to  be  proactive  in  taking  steps to safeguard data but also to recognize  attempts  by  unauthorized  parties  trying  to  gain network access.
Phishing, for example,  remains a remarkably effective tool for gain- ing credentials that open a door to the net- work  and  the  data  therein,  and  inadequate  training may increase a company’s vulnera- bility  to  phishing  attacks.
Regulators  know  this  and  expect  board  members  providing  cybersecurity oversight to know, too.
The  board  and  C-suite  also  must  bear  in  mind that successful initial implementation of  a cybersecurity program does not necessarily  lead to a cybersecurity program that has lon- gevity.
Ongoing success is largely dependent  on  top-down  involvement  by  the  board  and  active management by the C-suite.
The board     113  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  should be apprised regularly of data security  incidents and emerging data risks, as well as  changes  to  the  regulatory  environment.
An  actively informed and involved board, work- ing in harmony with the C-suite, enables agile  enterprise-wide  response  to  evolving  threats  and appropriate upkeep and improvement of  a robust cybersecurity program.
¦   Conclusion Today’s  cybersecurity  risks  affect  organiza- tions  of  all  sizes  and  across  industries  and  lead  to  not  only  IT  headaches  but  also  headaches for the entire business.
However,  the  C-suite  nevertheless  must  strive  to  employ  strong  cybersecurity  com- pliance and control measures that go beyond  mechanical  satisfaction  of  applicable  legal  rules,  and  the  board  has  an  obligation  to   ensure that these measures are being adopt- ed.
Only  with  consistent  C-suite  involve- ment and strong board oversight—informed  by an understanding of data risk as a central  enterprise risk—can cybersecurity challeng- es be handled effectively.
See  NIST,  “Framework  for  Improving  Critical  Infrastructure  Cybersecurity”  (2014)  (defi ning  “cybersecurity”).
Of  course  there  are  many  defi nitions  of  “cybersecurity”;  the  NIST  defi nition  adapted  here  is  just  a  recent  American  example.
For  example,  some  regulators  require  certain data to be encrypted while many  others  do  not.
See  International  Compliance Association,  “What is Compliance?,” available at http:// www.int-comp.org/faqs-compliance- regulatory-environment.
¦  114   SecurityRoundtable.org  Risks of disputes and regulatory  investigations related to  cybersecurity matters Baker & McKenzie — David Lashway, Partner; John  Woods, Partner; Nadia Banno, Counsel, Dispute  Resolution; and Brandon H. Graves, Associate  Disputes  and  regulatory  investigations  are  two  of  the  more  important  risk  categories  related  to  cybersecurity  matters.
Businesses  that  attempt  to  deal  with  risk  related to cybersecurity matters as an afterthought may be  left behind.
Many  businesses  are  international  in  scope  and  must  comply with cybersecurity rules and regulations in a vari- ety  of  countries.
The dynamic nature of cybersecurity matters makes it  impossible to completely enumerate every risk associated  with such matters.
115  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  ¦   Risks of disputes Businesses  have  a  growing  awareness  of  cybersecurity  matters.
Dispute risks in business activities Cybersecurity matters will impact every tra- ditional  business  activity,  if  they  do  not  already.
Two  activities,  contract  negotiation  and  data  processing,  are  already  subject  to  dispute in many industries.
government   cybersecurity  during    1.
Many  businesses  are  also  attempting  to  apply  existing  contract  provisions  to  cybersecurity  matters.
When this reinterpretation is put forward  in  the  wake  of  a  security  breach,  the  reinterpretation can lead to costly litigation.
Federal agencies,  especially the Department of Defense,  are  flow-down  provisions  related  to  cybersecurity  in  their  contracts  with  suppliers.
Often,  the  agency  requires  its  contractors  to  include  these  provisions  in  their  contracts  with  subcontractors  and  other  contractual  counterparties.
including  more   ¦  116   These  provisions  can  include  security  standards and breach disclosure require- ments.
For  instance,  Defense  Federal  Acquisition  Regulation  Supplement  (DFARS)  204.7300  requires  “adequate  security” for all contractors and subcon- tractors  with  systems  on  which  con- trolled technical information is resident  on  or  transits.
As  with  many  of  these  provisions,  “adequate  security”  is  not  defi ned with a checklist but as “protec- tive  measures  that  are  commensurate  with  the  consequences  and  probability  of loss, misuse, or unauthorized access  to, or modifi cation of information.”  These same provisions include report- ing  requirements  for  both  actual  and  potentially adverse effects on an infor- mation system, which is a more strin- gent  requirement  than  many  state  data breach requirements.
Cybersecurity creates  risk, and more businesses are looking  to  affi rmatively  allocate  that  risk  through  contractual  terms.
Actuaries  are  still  developing  tables  related  to  cybersecurity  risk  (Congress  is  discussing legislating on this issue), so  the allocation of risk in a contract may  not  be  based  on  methods  as  rigorous  as those in other risk allocations.
Cybersecurity incidents and the atten- dant response can be very expensive,  with some sources placing the average  fi nancial  cost  of  a  data  breach  in  the  millions  of  dollars.
The  allocation  of     RISKS OF DISPUTES AND REGULATORY INVESTIGATIONS RELATED TO CYBERSECURITY MATTERS   such  cost,  combined  with  an  increas- ing  chance  of  an  incident  triggering  these  clauses,  is  an  area  likely  to  be  subject  to  dispute  both  during  con- tract  negotiation  and  in  the  wake  of  a breach.
Many contracts already contain liabil- ity  allocation  provisions,  but  those  provisions  do  not  explicitly  address  cybersecurity matters.
In the wake of a  cybersecurity  incident,  interpreting  the liability allocation provisions will  be a matter of some dispute.
and  political   c)  Data  security  and  notifi cation.
Laws,  regulations,  and  consumer  pressure  have  increased  businesses’  focus  on  the  security  of  consumer  data.
Recognizing  these  trends,  businesses  are placing more provisions in contracts  that  dictate  security  requirements.
Other  businesses  are  attempting  to  read  existing  provisions  as  covering  security  requirements  and  privacy responsibility.
Many businesses that entrust sensitive  data  to  counterparties  are  including  breach  notifi cation  provisions  in  con- tracts.
These  provisions  vary  greatly,  even within a single industry, and cre- ate various thresholds for notifi cation.
For instance, some provisions require  notifi cation  in  the  event  of  a  breach.
Others  require  notifi cation  if  there  is  an  indication  of  a  breach.
Many  vic- tims of a security breach seek to keep  the  existence  of  a  breach  out  of  the   press,  which  can  create  tension  with  notifi cation provisions.
One  business may seek to sell information it is  collecting while a contractual counterparty  is attempting to safeguard the same data.
Some  of  these  provisions  are  triggered  by  a  breach,  such  as  obligations  to  notify  consumers  whose  information  is  exposed.
A  counterparty  may  allege  that  other  provisions  are  broken  by  an  intrusion,  such  as  a  requirement  to  have  adequate  or  reasonable  security.
Businesses often struggle with whether a  particular provision requires notifi cation,  either  because  the  provision  itself  is  not  clear  or  because  the  business  believes  that  the  intrusion  does  not  rise  to  the  level  contemplated  the  contract.
in     117  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  Counterparties  may  disagree  with  this  interpretation,  leading  to  disputes  if  the  intrusion does come to light.
Reviewing and  attempting  to  interpret  these  provisions  after an intrusion also creates risk of con- tractual  breach,  as  a  business  may  not  discover  the  notifi cation  provision  until  after the required time frame has passed.
In the wake of a breach, a victim’s securi- ty  will  come  under  scrutiny,  and  a  con- tractual counterparty may argue that the  security  was  inadequate  under  the  con- tract.
For  instance,  in  the  DFARS  provi- sion  discussed  previously,  “adequate  security”  is  ripe  for  protracted  litigation  in the wake of a cybersecurity incident.
In some industries, such as those that deal  with  payment  cards,  many  security  requirements  are  codifi ed  and  subject  to  audit.
The victim of a data breach may be  subject  to  a  more  intrusive  audit  to  con- fi rm its security.
A  counterparty  may  rightly  inquire  how  such a certifi cation was made in the wake  of a cybersecurity incident.
Our more interconnected society has  spread the effects of cybersecurity problems,  and  affected  parties  are  developing  more  creative  methods  to  fi le  suit  against  the  original victim of the intrusion.
More  and  more  insurance  companies  are  offering  cyber  policies,  and  more  businesses  are  attempting  to  make claims for intrusions under general  policies.
RISKS OF DISPUTES AND REGULATORY INVESTIGATIONS RELATED TO CYBERSECURITY MATTERS   ¦   Risks of regulatory investigations Certain  regulators  have  explicit  statutory  jurisdiction  over  cybersecurity  matters.
As pub- lic and congressional scrutiny of cybersecu- rity  measures  increases,  regulators  will  be  more  aggressive  in  asserting  jurisdiction  over their regulated entities’ cybersecurity  matters.
Industry  regulators.
Traditional  regulators  have  already  applied  or  are  planning  to  apply  standards  related  to  cybersecurity  matters  their  regulated  entities.
The  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination Council (FFIEC), the Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC),  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC),  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS),  and  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  are  some  of  the  regulators  that  have  sought  to  regulate  cybersecurity  matters  among  their  regulated  entities.
In  addition,  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  publishes  documents  that  plaintiffs  and  regulators  apply  in  analyzing a business’s cybersecurity.
The  FFIEC  has  been  one  of  the  leading  regulators  with  regard  to  cybersecurity.
In addition, the FFIEC requires  fi nancial  institutions  to  require  certain  cybersecurity  measures  of  the  institu- tions’ third-party service providers, effec- tively expanding the FFIEC’s jurisdiction.
The FFIEC has experience in investigating  data breaches and imposing punishments  based on insuffi cient security.
Other regu- lators  look  to  the  FFIEC’s  examination  handbook  to  inform  their  own  regula- tions and investigations.
The  FTC  has  been  aggressive  in  fi ling  administrative  complaints  against  busi- nesses that, in the eyes of the FTC, do not  adequately  protect  sensitive  consumer  information.
The  FTC  requires,  among  other things, “reasonable security” but pro- vides  no  formal  defi nition.
The  FTC  is  involved  in  litigation  in  federal  court  concerning  both  its  jurisdiction  over  data  security  and  the  standards  it  applies  to  businesses.
FCC’s   Cybersecurity   The  and  Communications  Reliability  Division  works to maintain the reliability of commu- nications infrastructure in the face of vari- ous  cyberthreats.
In  2014  the  FCC  began  imposing substantial fi nes on wireless carri- ers  for  insuffi cient  secured  sensitive  con- sumer information.
HHS  regulates  cybersecurity  matters  under  the  Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
Under  this  authority,  HHS  has  imposed  multimillion-dollar  fi nes  for  insuffi cient  data security.
DHS is involved in coordinating informa- tion  sharing,  securing  critical  infrastruc- ture, and protecting federal cybersecurity  assets.
Currently,  its  programs  for  most  private  businesses  are  voluntary,  but  as  Congress continues to focus on informa- tion sharing as a key component of reduc- ing cybersecurity incidents, plaintiffs and  courts  will  see  these  programs  less  as  voluntary  and  more  as  the  minimum  standard of care.
NIST  publishes  an  array  of  standards  related to cybersecurity.
Although none of  these  standards  are  binding  on  private  entities  (at  least  as  of  publication),  they     119  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  are often cited as what is reasonable secu- rity or as industry standard.
In addition,  plaintiffs  and  regulators  look  to  NIST  standards  to  inform  allegations  made  in  complaints and investigations.
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.
The  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC), under pressure from Congress, has  focused  on  public  statements  concerning  data  breaches.
According  to  the  SEC,  registrants  “should  disclose  the  risk  of  cyber incidents if these issues are among  the  most  signifi cant  factors  that  make  an  investment  in  the  company  specula- tive or risky.”  The SEC, in conjunction with the Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority,  has  engaged  in  enforcement  actions  against  the  entities  they  regulate  for  insuffi cient  security  for  both  customer  data  and  market data.
State regulators State  regulators  and  attorneys  general  are  also  involved  in  cybersecurity  matters;  indeed,  state  attorneys  general  have  been  active  in  investigating  data  breaches.
California  has  generally  been  the  fi rst  state  to  impose  data  breach  notifi cation  requirements.
In  the  time  since, California has expanded what data are  covered  by  the  statute,  including  most  recently  usernames  and  passwords.
Several other states, including Vermont,  New  York,  and  Michigan,  have  been  par- ticularly active in investigations.
For certain  larger  breaches,  some  state  attorneys  gen- eral  will  work  together  in  a  coordinated  investigation.
¦  Conclusion Cybersecurity matters create extensive risks  for business.
¦  120   SecurityRoundtable.org  Legal considerations for  cybersecurity insurance K&L Gates LLP – Roberta D. Anderson, Partner  ¦  Legal, regulatory, and additional concerns driving   the purchase of cybersecurity insurance  Legal liability, regulatory and other exposures surrounding cybersecurity  and data privacy-related incidents In addition to a seemingly endless stream of data breaches  and  other  serious  cybersecurity  and  data  protection- related incidents, the past several years have seen signifi - cantly amplifi ed legal liability surrounding cybersecurity  and  data  privacy,  a  remarkable  proliferation  and  expan- sion  of  cybersecurity  and  privacy-related  laws,  and  increasingly heightened regulatory scrutiny.
In  the  wake  of  a  data  breach  of  any  consequence,  an  organization is likely to face myriad different forms of legal  and regulatory exposure, including class action litigation,  shareholder derivative litigation, regulatory investigation,  the costs associated with forensic investigation, notifi cation  to  persons  whose  information  may  have  been  compro- mised, credit monitoring, call center services, public rela- tions expenses, and other event management activities.
Beyond  third-party  liability  and  event  management  activities,  organizations  face  substantial  fi rst-party  losses  associated with reputational injury and damage to brand in  the wake of a serious breach event.
Even if an organization’s own  system  is  not  compromised,  the  organization  may  suffer  signifi cant losses if an incident affects a key vendor, cloud  provider, or any key third party in the organization’s prod- uct and service supply chain.
Also at stake is the organiza- tion’s digital assets, the value of which in some cases may  eclipse the value of the organization’s other property.
Cybersecurity  insurance  can  play  a  vital  role  in  an  organization’s  overall  strategy  to  address,  mitigate,  and  maximize protection against the legal and other exposures  fl owing from data breaches and other serious cybersecu- rity, privacy, and data protection-related incidents.
121  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  SEC’s cybersecurity risk factor disclosure guidance and  cybersecurity insurance In  October  2011,  in  the  wake  of  what  it  phrased  “more  frequent  and  severe  cyber  incidents,”  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission’s (SEC’s) Division of Corporation  Finance issued disclosure guidance on cyber- security,  which  advises  that  companies  “should  review,  on  an  ongoing  basis,  the  adequacy  of  their  disclosure  relating  to  cybersecurity risks and cyber incidents.” The  guidance  advises  that  “appropriate  disclo- sures  may  include,”  among  other  things,  a  “[d]escription  of  relevant  insurance  cover- age” that the company has in place to address  cybersecurity risk.
SEC comments in this area have regularly  requested  information  regarding  “whether  [the company] ha[s] obtained relevant insur- ance coverage,” as well as “the amount of [the  company]’s  cyber  liability  insurance.”  More  recently, the SEC is asking not only whether  the company has cybersecurity insurance and  how  much  the  company  has  but  also  how  solid the company’s coverage is:  “We note that your network-security insur- ance  coverage  is  subject  to  a  $10  million  deductible.
“We  note  your  disclosure  that  an  unau- thorized party was able to gain access to  your computer network ‘in a prior fi scal  year.’ So that an investor is better able to  understand the materiality of this cyber- security  incident,  please  revise  your  dis- closure  to  identify  when  the  cyber  inci- dent  occurred  and  describe  any  material  costs or consequences to you as a result of  the incident.
Please also further describe  your  cyber  security  insurance  policy,  including  any  material  limits  on  cover- age.” (Emphasis added.)
¦  The exclusion of cybersecurity and data  privacy-related coverage from traditional  insurance policies  In response to decisions upholding coverage  for  cybersecurity  and  data  privacy-related  risks under traditional lines of insurance cov- erage, such as Commercial General Liability  (CGL)  coverage,  the  insurance  industry  has  added various limitations and exclusions to  traditional lines of coverage.
By  way  of  example,  Insurance  Services  Offi ce  (ISO),  the  insurance  industry  organi- zation that develops standard insurance pol- icy  language,  recently  introduced  a  new  series of cybersecurity and data breach exclu- sionary  endorsements  to  its  standard-form  CGL policies, which became effective in May  2014.
One  of  the  endorsements,  entitled  “Exclusion  -  Access  Or  Disclosure  Of  Confi dential  Or  Personal  Information  And  Data-Related Liability - Limited Bodily Injury  Exception Not Included,” adds the following  exclusion to the primary CGL policy:  This insurance does not apply to:   p. Access Or Disclosure Of Confi dential Or  Personal  Information  And  Data-related  Liability  Damages arising out of:    (1)  Any  access  to  or  disclosure  of  any  person’s or organization’s confi dential  or  personal  information,  including  patents,  trade  secrets,  processing  methods,  customer  lists,  fi nancial  information,  credit  card  information,  health  information  or  any  other  type  of non public information; or    (2)  The loss of, loss of use of, damage to,  corruption  of,  inability  to  access,  or  inability to manipulate electronic data.
The  SEC’s  guidance  provides  another  com- pelling reason for publicly traded companies   This  exclusion  applies  even  if  damages  are claimed for notifi cation costs, credit   ¦  122     LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE    monitoring expenses, forensic expenses,  public  relations  expenses  or  any  other  loss, cost or expense incurred by you or  others  arising  out  of  that  which  is  described in Paragraph (1) or (2) above.
.”  Although there may be signifi cant poten- tial  coverage  for  cybersecurity  and  data  privacy-related incidents under an organiza- tion’s traditional insurance policies, includ ing  its  Directors’  and  Officers’  Liability,  Professional  Liability,  Fiduciary  Liability,  Crime, CGL, and Commercial Property poli- cies,  the  new  exclusions  provide  another  reason for organizations to carefully consider  specialty cybersecurity insurance products.
¦  Types of cybersecurity insurance Established coverages There  are  a  number  of  established  third- party  coverages  (i.e.,  covering  an  organiza- tion’s potential liability to third parties) and  fi rst-party  coverages  (e.g.,  covering  the  organization’s own digital assets and income  loss) as summarized in Table 1:  Emerging markets In  addition  to  the  established  coverages,  three  signifi cant  emerging  markets  provide  coverage for the following:   ?
third-party  bodily  injury  and  property  damage that may result from an electronic  data-related incident  TABLE  Type  Privacy liability  Network security  liability  Regulatory liability   PCI DSS liability  Media liability  THIRD-PARTY COVERAGES  Description  Generally covers third-party liability, including defense and  judgments or settlements, arising from data breaches, such as  the Target breach, and other failures to protect protected and  confi dential information  Generally covers third-party liability, including defense and  judgments or settlements, arising from security threats to  networks, e.g., inability to access the insured’s network  because of a DDoS attack or transmission of malicious code  to a third-party network  Generally covers amounts payable in connection with  administrative or regulatory investigations and proceedings,  including regulatory fi nes and penalties Generally covers amounts payable in connection with payment  card industry demands for assessments, including contractual  fi les and penalties, for alleged noncompliance with PCI Data  Security Standards Generally covers third-party liability arising from infringement  of copyright or other intellectual property rights and torts such  as libel, slander, and defamation, which arise from media-related  activities, e.g., broadcasting and advertising   Continued    123  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  TABLE  Type  Crisis management  Network  interruption  Contingent  network  interruption Digital assets  Extortion  FIRST-PARTY COVERAGES  Description   Generally covers “crisis management” expenses that typically  follow in the wake of a breach incident, e.g., breach notifi cation  costs, credit monitoring, call center services, forensic  investigations, and public relations efforts Generally covers the organization’s income loss associated  with the interruption of the its business caused by the failure of  computer systems/networks Generally covers the organization’s income loss associated with  the interruption of the its business caused by the failure of a  third-party’s computer systems/networks Generally covers the organization’s costs associated with  replacing, recreating, restoring, and repairing damaged or  destroyed computer programs, software, and electronic data  Generally covers losses associated with cyber extortion, e.g.,  payment of an extortionist’s demand to prevent a cybersecurity  or data privacy-related incident    ?
reputational  injury  resulting  from  an  incident that adversely affects the public  perception of the insured organization or  its brand.
Because  privacy  and  electronic  data-related  exclusions  continue  to  make  their  way  into  traditional  property  and  liability  insurance  policies,  and  given  that  an  organization’s  largest exposures may fl ow from reputational  injury  and  brand  tarnishment,  these  emerg- ing coverages will be increasingly valuable.
¦  Strategic tips for purchasing cybersecurity   insurance  Cybersecurity  insurance  coverage  can  be  extremely  valuable,  but  choosing  the  right  insurance product presents signifi cant chal- lenges.
In  addition,  the  specifi c  needs of different industry sectors, and dif- ferent organizations within those sectors, are  far-reaching and diverse.
The cyber insurance  market is extremely competitive, and cyber  insurance  policies  are  highly  negotiable.
The  following  are  fi ve  strategic  tips  for   purchasing cyber insurance:  Adopt a team approach.
Successful placement of cybersecurity insur- ance  coverage  is  a  collaborative  undertak- ing.
Because of the nature of the product and  the risks that it is intended to cover, success- ful placement requires the involvement and  input not only of a capable risk management  department and a knowledgeable insurance  broker but also of in-house legal counsel and  IT  professionals,  resources,  and  compliance  personnel—and experienced insurance cov- erage counsel.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE    Understand risk profi le and tolerance.
A  successful  insurance  placement  is  facili- tated  by  having  a  thorough  understanding  of  an  organization’s  risk  profi le,  including  the following:   ?
the organization’s network infrastructure  ?
the  organization’s  cybersecurity,  privacy,   and data protection practices   ?
the  organization’s  state  of  compliance   with regulatory and industry standards   ?
the use of unencrypted mobile and other   portable devices.
When an organization has a grasp on its  risk profi le, potential exposure, and risk tol- erance,  it  is  well  positioned  to  consider  the  type and amount of insurance coverage that  it needs to adequately respond to identifi ed  risks and exposure.
Table 2 shows ten  of the important questions to ask when con- sidering  third-party  and  fi rst-party  cyber  insurance.
The list is not exhaustive, and many other  questions  should  be  considered,  including,  for example, the extent to which the policy   TABLE  Third-Party   First-Party   Does the policy:   Does the policy:   cover the acts, errors, and omissions of  third parties, e.g., vendors, for which  the organization may be liable?
cover data in the care, custody, or  control of third parties, e.g., cloud  providers?
cover personally identifi able information  in any form, e.g., paper records?
exclude unencrypted devices?
cover business income loss resulting from  system failures in addition to failures of  network security, e.g., any unplanned  outages?
cover contingent business income loss resulting  from the failure of a third-party network?
cover business income loss after a network  is up and running, but before business  returns to full pre-incident operation?
125  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  covers,  or  excludes,  cyberterrorism.
In  all  cases, the organization should request a ret- roactive  date  of  at  least  1  year  prior  to  the  policy inception, given that advanced attacks  go undetected for a median of 229 days.
Some insurers, for  example,  may  insert  exclusions  based  on  purported  shortcomings  in  the  insured’s  security measures.
The  case  is  Columbia  Casualty  Company  v.  Cottage  Health  System,  in  which  Columbia  Casualty,  CNA’s  non-admitted  insurer,  seeks  to  avoid  coverage  under  a  cybersecurity insurance policy for the defense  and settlement of a data breach class action  lawsuit and related regulatory investigation.
CNA  relies  principally  upon  an  exclusion,  entitled  “Failure  to  Follow  Minimum  Required Practices,” which purports to void  coverage if the insured fails to “continuously  implement”  certain  aspects  of  computer  security.
The good news  is  that,  although  certain  types  of  exclusions  are unrealistic given the nature of the risk an  insured  is  attempting  to  insure  against,  cybersecurity  insurance  policies  are  highly  negotiable.
CNA in the Columbia Casualty case also seeks  to deny coverage based upon alleged misrep- resentations contained in the insured’s insur- ance application relating to the risk controls.
The important takeaway is that cybersecurity  insurance  applications  can,  and  usually  do, contain a myriad of questions concerning   ¦  126   an  organization’s  cybersecurity  and  data  protection practices, seeking detailed informa- tion  surrounding  technical,  complex  subject  matter.
¦  Tips for prevailing in cyber insurance   coverage litigation  As CNA’s recently fi led coverage action in the  Columbia  Casualty  case  illustrates,  cybersecu- rity insurance coverage disputes and litigation  are  coming.
In  the  wake  of  a  data  breach  or  other privacy, cybersecurity, or data protection- related incident, organizations should antici- pate that their insurer may deny coverage for  a resulting claim against the policy.
Before  a  claim  arises,  organizations  are  encouraged  to  proactively  negotiate  and  place the best possible coverage to decrease  the  likelihood  of  a  coverage  denial.
In  con- trast to many types of commercial insurance  policies, cybersecurity policies are extremely  negotiable,  and  the  insurer’s  off-the-shelf  forms can usually be signifi cantly negotiated  and improved for no increase in premium.
Getting  overly caught up in the weeds of policy inter- pretive  and  legal  issues,  particularly  at  the   outset, risks losing the organization’s critical  audience  and  obfuscating  a  winningly  con- cise,  compelling  story  that  is  easy  to  under- stand,  follow,  and  sympathize  with.
Boiled  down to its essence, the story may be—and in  this context often is—something as simple as  the following:  “They promised to protect us from a cyber  breach if we paid the insurance premium.
Many  off-the-shelf  cybersecurity  insurance  policies,  for  example,  limit  the  scope of coverage to only the insured’s own  acts and omissions, or only to incidents that  affect  the  insured’s  network.
A  myriad  of  other  traps  in  cyber insurance policies—even more in those  that are not carefully negotiated—may allow  insurers  to  avoid  coverage  if  the  language  were applied literally.
Taking  the  Columbia  Casualty  case  as  an  example,  the  insurer,  CNA,  relies  principally  upon  an  exclusion,  entitled  “Failure  to  Follow  Minimum  Required  Practices,”  which  pur- ports  to  void  coverage  if  the  insured  fails  to  “continuously  implement”  certain  aspects  of  computer  security.
In  this  context,  however,  comprising  the  extremely  complex  areas  of  cybersecurity and data protection, any insured  can reasonably be expected to make mistakes  in  implementing  security.
This  reality  is,  in  fact,  a  principal  reason  for  purchasing  cyber  liability coverage in the fi rst place.
In addition,     LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CYBERSECURITY INSURANCE    CNA  represented  in  its  marketing  materials  that  the  policy  at  issue  in  Columbia  Casualty  offers  “exceptional  fi rst-and  third-party  cyber  liability coverage to address a broad range of  exposures,”  including  “security  breaches”  and “mistakes”:  Cyber  liability  and  CNA  NetProtect  products  fills   CNA  NetProtect  the  gaps  by  offering  exceptional  fi rst-  and  third- party cyber liability coverage to address a  broad  range  of  exposures.
CNA  NetProtect covers insureds for exposures  that  include  security  breaches,  mistakes,  and  unauthorized  employee  acts,  virus  attacks, hacking, identity theft or private  information  loss,  and  infringing  or  dis- paraging content.
Secure the best potential venue and choice of law.
One  of  the  fi rst  and  most  critical  decisions  that  an  organization  contemplating  insur- ance  coverage  litigation  must  make  is  the  appropriate  forum  for  the  litigation.
The  different     127  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  interpretations  given  the  same  language  from one state to the next can mean the dif- ference  between  a  coverage  victory  and  a  loss.
Often when there is a cybersecurity, privacy,  or  data  protection-related  issue,  more  than  one  insurance  policy  may  be  triggered.
For  example, a data breach like the Target breach  may  implicate  an  organization’s  cybersecu- rity insurance, CGL insurance, and Directors’  and  Offi cers’  Liability  insurance.
To  the  extent that insurers on different lines of cov- erage have denied coverage, it may be ben- efi cial  for  the  organization  to  have  those  insurance carriers pointing the fi nger at each  other  throughout  the  insurance  coverage  proceedings.
Again considering the context,  a judge, arbitrator, or jury may fi nd it offen- sive if an organization’s CGL insurer is argu- ing,  on  the  one  hand,  that  a  data  breach  is  not covered because of a new exclusion, and  the organization’s cybersecurity insurer also  is  arguing  that  the  breach  is  not  covered  under  the  cyber  policy  that  was  purchased  to  fi ll  the  “gap”  in  coverage  created  by  the  CGL policy exclusion.
Retain counsel with cybersecurity insurance expertise.
Cybersecurity  insurance  is  unlike  any  other  line of coverage.
There is no standardization.
Obtaining  coverage  litigation  counsel  with  substantial cybersecurity insurance expertise  assists an organization on a number of fronts.
Importantly,  it  will  give  the  organization  unique access to compelling arguments based  upon  the  context,  history,  evolution,  and  intent  of  this  line  of  insurance  product.
Likewise, during the discovery phase, cover- age  counsel  with  unique  knowledge  and  experience is positioned to ask for and obtain  the particular information and evidence that  can make or break the case—and will be able  to do so in a relatively effi cient, streamlined  manner.
Likewise,  counsel familiar with all of the many different  insurer-drafted  forms  as  they  have  evolved  over  time  will  give  the  organization  key  access to arguments based upon obvious and  subtle  differences  between  and  among  the  many  different  policy  wordings,  including  the particular language in the organization’s  policy.
¦  Conclusion Cyber insurance coverage can be extremely  valuable.
Before  a  claim arises, organizations are encouraged to  proactively negotiate and place the best pos- sible coverage in order to decrease the likeli- hood of a coverage denial and litigation.
In  contrast to many other types of commercial  insurance  policies,  cyber  insurance  policies  are  extremely  negotiable,  and  the  insurers’  off-the-shelf  forms  typically  can  be  signifi - cantly  negotiated  and  improved  for  no  increase  in  premium.
If  a  claim  arises,  following  sound  litigation  strategies  and  refusing  to  take  “no”  for  an  answer  will  greatly  increase  the  odds  of  securing valuable coverage.
Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman & Dicker LLP –  Melissa Ventrone, Partner and Lindsay Nickle, Partner  From  a  legal  perspective,  consumer  protection  is  the  application  of  rules  and  regulations  to  agencies,  busi- nesses,  and  organizations  that  require  them  to  protect  their customers from intentional and unintentional harm.
The intersection of consumer protection and cyber- security  imposes  a  responsibility  on  businesses  to  protect  their  consumers’  information.
Unlike  many  areas of business, when an organization is the victim  of  a  criminal  attack,  such  as  being  hacked,  the  busi- ness is not considered a victim.
Leading experts agree that  no organization is immune from cyberattacks and that  impenetrable data security is not possible.
Consumers  demand  that  organizations  safeguard  their  privacy  and  protect  their  information  from  data  breaches; however, those same consumers are impatient  and intolerant when security measures slow services or  degrade  usability.
129  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  Adding to the diffi culty of trying to bal- ance data privacy and security with innova- tion and usability, organizations must con- currently  maintain  compliance  with  the  myriad  of  state  and  federal  data  privacy  and  security  laws,  regulations,  and  guide- lines.
It would take several books to outline  all  the  laws,  regulations,  and  guidelines  that  affect  consumer  protection  and  cyber- security.
This  chapter  is  designed  to  pro- vide  organizations  with  an  understanding  of those laws that have the most signifi cant  impact on privacy and security from a con- sumer  protection  perspective.
¦  Cybersecurity, consumer protection,   and the FTC  The  FTC  has  deemed  itself  the  enforcer  of  data  privacy  and  security,  the  ultimate  authority  responsible  for  protecting  con- sumer privacy and promoting data security  in  the  private  sector.
Although  the  debate  continues  on  whether  the  FTC  has  authority to police data privacy and security  under section 5 of the FTC Act, organizations  must be aware that the FTC and other regu- lators  are  monitoring  practices  and  investi- gating and enforcing various laws under the  guise of privacy and cybersecurity as a con- sumer protection issue.
The  FTC  regulates  this  space  under  sec- tion 5 of the FTC Act, which prohibits unfair  or deceptive practices.
The FTC may choose  to  investigate  an  organization  if  it  believes  that  the  organization  has  made  materially  misleading statements or omissions regard- ing  the  security  provided  for  consumers’  personal  data.
Further,  according  to  a  pre- pared  statement  by  the  FTC,  “a  company  engages in unfair acts or practices if its data  security practices cause or are likely to cause  substantial  injury  to  consumers  that  is  nei- ther  reasonably  avoidable  by  the  consumer  nor  outweighed  by  countervailing  benefi ts  to consumers or to competition.”  ¦  130   What does this mean?
Well, according to an  FTC report, this means that an organization’s  data  security  measures  must  be  “reasonable  and appropriate in light of the sensitivity and  volume of consumer information it holds, the  size and complexity of its data operations, and  the cost of available tools to improve security  and  reduce  vulnerabilities.”  In  other  words,  the FTC can choose to investigate an organiza- tion  simply  because  the  FTC  believes  the  organization  is  doing  a  poor  job  protecting  consumers’  information.
Frankly,  it  appears  that  the  FTC  views  poor  cybersecurity  practices  a  bit  like  courts  view  pornography—they  know  it  when they see it.
Organizations   looking  for  guidance  from  the  FTC  on  appropriate  security  measures to protect consumer information  may  fi nd  themselves  twisting  in  the  wind  like the last leaf on a tree.
The FTC has not  issued  any  detailed  guidelines  on  what  constitutes “reasonable security measures.”  To be fair, the FTC most likely struggles, as  do many agencies, with establishing guide- lines that are fl exible enough to apply to a  wide range of organizations in a variety of  industries,  yet  structured  enough  to  set  a  standard.
The  FTC  addressed  this  argument  by  instructing companies to review its previous  consent  decrees  to  identify  “reasonable”— or more appropriately, what it considered to  be unreasonable—security standards.
Thus,  in  the  midst  of  day-to-day  operations,  the  FTC  apparently  expects  an  organization  to  carefully  review  a  multitude  of  previous  consent decrees to identify what it should be  doing  to  reasonably  protect  consumers’  information.
Organizations can also review a 15-page  guide the FTC published in 2011, Protecting  Personal  Information:  A  Guide  for  Business.
This  guide  informs  organizations  that  a  “sound  business  plan”  is  based  on  fi ve  principles:   ?
Know  what  information  you  have  and   who has access to the information.
Keep  only  that  information  needed  to   conduct business.
Protect the information in your control.
Properly dispose of information that is no   longer needed.
Prepare a plan for responding to security   incidents.
The  FTC  claims to recognize that there is no one-size- fi ts-all data security program, no program is  perfect,  and  the  mere  fact  that  a  breach  occurs  does  not  mean  a  company  has  vio- lated the law.
Organizations  must  be  aware  of  the  FTC’s  heightened  activity  in  this  space.
Right  now,  data  privacy  and  protection  of  consumer  information  has  the  public’s  attention and is sometimes used as a politi- cal  platform.
Organizations  must  have  an  in-depth  understanding  of  their  cybersecu- rity  posture,  identify  key  vulnerabilities,  and have a plan to either mitigate or remedi- ate  problems.
Failure  to  place  consumer  protection and cybersecurity at the top of its  priority list may land an organization in the  FTC’s crosshairs.
priority is the strengthening of cybersecurity  in the marketplace, particularly as it pertains  to the fi nancial industry and those businesses  and organizations that provide services in the  fi nancial sector.
To that end, in the summer of  2014,  the  FFIEC  completed  a  cybersecurity  assessment involving more than 500 commu- nity  fi nancial  institutions  with  the  goal  of  determining how prepared those institutions  were  to  mitigate  cyber  risks.
The  results  are  instructive  as  potential  standards  for  the  efforts an organization should take when its  operations  interact  with  or  are  tangential  to  the fi nancial industry, or simply when a busi- ness  collects,  stores,  or  shares  consumers’  private information.
Cyber  preparedness—which  is  the  crux  of  consumer  protection—encompasses  the  following:   ?
Risk  management  and  oversight:  Organizations  should  proactively  train  employees, allocate resources, and exercise  control  and  supervision  of  cybersecurity  operations.
This includes involving upper- level management and boards.
Threat  intelligence:  A  business  should  undertake  processes  to  educate,  identify,  and track cyber activities, vulnerabilities,  and threats.
¦  Cybersecurity, consumer protection,   and the fi nancial industry  As  in  other  industries,  cybersecurity  and  consumer  protection  in  the  fi nancial  sector  are  a  patchwork  of  federal  statutes,  regula- tions, agencies, and enforcers.
A representative from each of them  sits  on  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (FFIEC),  which  is  empowered to set out principles, standards,  and forms for the uniformity of the supervi- sion  of  fi nancial  institutions.
Cybersecurity   controls:  Businesses  should  implement  controls  to  prevent  unauthorized  access  or  exposure  of  information, to detect attacks or attempts  to  compromise  systems,  and  to  correct  known  and  identifi ed  vulnerabilities.
As  the  industry  begins  to  more  fully  recognize the futility of keeping malicious  attackers  outside  the  network  perimeter,  companies  also  implement  controls that more quickly identify when  malicious  activity  takes  place  inside  the  network.
External  dependency  management:  Organizations  should  have  processes  in  place to manage vendors and third-party  service  providers  and  help  ensure  that  connections to systems are secure, as well  as  processes  to  audit  and  evaluate  the  third-party’s cybersecurity protections.
131  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS   ?
Cyber   incident  management   and  resilience:  Organizations  should  have  procedures and processes to detect incidents,  respond  to  those  incidents,  mitigate  the  impact  of  the  incidents,  document  and  report  on  the  incidents,  and  provide  for  recovery and business continuity.
Efforts to  protect  consumers  from  the  dangers  of  the  exposure of personal information entrusted  to a business involve guiding the organiza- tion through these steps on a scale appropri- ate to the size of the business and the scope  of the information involved.
Adding to the complexity of compliance,  there  are  multiple  statutes  and  regulations  that  expressly  require  businesses  to  under- take security measures and notify consumers  regarding privacy and information-sharing  practices.
The  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  (GLBA) and the corresponding regulations  adopted to implement its requirements are  aimed  at  protecting  consumer  interests.
Similar to other regulations, businesses are  required  by  the  GLBA  Safeguard  Rule  to  use “reasonable security measures” to pro- tect consumer information that they collect  and store.
In the fi nancial services industry,  this  often  includes  highly  sensitive  infor- mation,  such  as  Social  Security  numbers,  fi nancial account numbers, and income and  credit histories.
Fortunately, the GLBA outlines, at least in  some  fashion,  what  constitutes  “reasonable  security measures.” For instance, the GLBA  Safeguard  Rule  requires  the  development  and  implementation  of  a  written  informa- tion  security  plan.
In  addition,  the  Rule  requires  companies  to  provide  an  annual  written  privacy  notice  to  its  customers  that  clearly,  conspicuously,  and  accurately  explains  its  information-sharing  practices  and provides customers the right to opt out  of the organization’s sharing practices.
Those  entities  governed  by  the  SEC  (Securities and Exchange Commission) and  FINRA  (Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority) are expressly required to devel- op  written  identity  theft  prevention  pro- grams  and,  in  the  face  of  a  breach,  will  likely  face  questions  regarding  cybersecu- rity policies and efforts.
Further, the regula- tions imposing these requirements mandate  that  upper-level  management  signs  off  on  any written program and participates in its  administration.
As the goal of these require- ments  is  to  protect  customer  information,  an  organization  should  be  mindful  to  design programs that consider the nature of  the organization’s operations, as well as its  size and complexity, so that the plan can be  effectively  implemented  to  achieve  its  desired goals.
The  OCC  recommends  all  banks  and  fi nancial  institutions  implement  incident  response  and  business  continuity  plans  and  test  those  plans  regularly.
It  also  sets  supervisory expectations about how fi nan- cial  institutions  and  third-party  service  providers  in  the  fi nancial  sector  can  and  should  safeguard  sensitive  information.
The  OCC  is  vested  with  the  authority  to  require the banks subject to their regulation  and  the  banks’  service  providers  to  take  steps  to  protect  systems,  prevent  loss  or  theft of sensitive information, and mitigate  identity theft.
In 2007, under the terms of the Fair and  Accurate Credit Transactions Act, the OCC,  FRB, FDIC, NCUA, and FTC issued regula- tions requiring creditors and fi nancial insti- tutions  to  develop  and  implement  formal  written programs aimed at identifying and  preventing  identity  theft  (the  Red  Flags  Rule).
Large  banks  have  resident  OCC  investigators trained to assess cybersecurity   issues.
In  2013,  the  OCC  updated  its  Third-Party  Relationship  Risk  Management Guidance to set out expecta- tions for risk assessment and management  of  third-party  relationships.
The  senior  management  and  boards  of  banks  retain  responsibility for cybersecurity even when  third  parties  are  involved.
As  a  result,  the  OCC  mandates  comprehensive  oversight  and  management  of  third-party  relation- ships  throughout  the  life  of  each  relation- ship.
This requires extensive due diligence  prior to establishing a relationship, execu- tion of written contracts that should include  the  right  to  audit  the  third  party,  ongoing  monitoring, documentation, and reporting  regarding risk management processes, and  independent  review  of  processes.
Further,  the OCC requires that third-party contracts  stipulate that the OCC has the authority to  examine and regulate the services provided  to the bank by the third party.
The  fi nancial  industry  is  highly  regulat- ed, and its consumer protection and cyber- security  aspects  are  no  exception.
Enforceable  security  guidelines  set  out  by  regulators  and  aimed  at  the  protec- tion  of  consumer  information  trickle  down  to service providers, as the fi nancial institu- tions are affi rmatively charged with manag- ing  risks  associated  with  vendors  and  service  providers.
The  recommendations  and requirements of the fi nancial regulators  make  clear  that  extensive  due  diligence,  monitoring, planning, and management are  required  in  the  quest  to  take  reasonable  security measures.
¦  Health care, cybersecurity, and consumer   protection  Any discussion of consumer protection and  cybersecurity must include a discussion of  the  health  care  industry.
The  Health  Insurance  Portability  and  Accountability  Act  of  1996  (HIPAA)  governs  protected  health  information  (PHI)  maintained  by  various  organizations  that  fall  under  the  jurisdiction of HIPAA (covered entities) and     CONSUMER PROTECTION: WHAT IS IT?
other organizations that may receive health  information  from  covered  entities  while  performing  various  services.
OCR’s  authority   to  enforce  HIPAA  encompasses  covered  entities  regardless  of  size  and  their  “business  associates,”  a  term  that includes fi rst-tier vendors that contract  directly with covered entities and all down- stream entities that receive PHI in the course  of  their  business.
Perhaps  the  most  helpful  aspect  of  HIPAA  is  that  it  specifi es  privacy  requirements that covered entities must fol- low,  as  well  as  identifi es  security  elements  for covered entities to consider.
Uses that fall out- side  of  these  categories  or  that  do  not  qualify as any of the exceptions described in  the  rule  require  an  authorization  from  the  affected individual.
Meanwhile, the HIPAA  Security Rule establishes standards for pre- serving  the  confi dentiality,  integrity,  and  availability  of  electronic  PHI.
Specifi cally,  the  Security  Rule  requires  covered  entities  to  have  appropriate  administrative,  physi- cal,  and  technical  safeguards  in  place  to  protect  PHI  and  contains  detailed  security  requirements  for  protecting  PHI.
For  instance,  covered  entities  must  conduct  an  assessment  of  the  risks  to  and  vulnerabili- ties  of  the  protected  health  information.
These  guidelines  provide  organizations  with  concrete  examples  of  steps  needed  to  protect PHI and hence the consumer infor- mation in their systems.
However, organiza- tions should be aware that compliance with  HIPAA is a minimum standard.
As technol- ogy  continues  to  change  and  develop,  cir- cumstances  may  require  organizations  to  exceed  the  minimum  HIPAA  compliance  requirements to effectively protect consumer  information.
133  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  This  is  an  important  point,  because  in  addition  to  OCR,  the  FTC  considers  itself  empowered  to  regulate  organizations  that  are  covered  by  HIPAA.
Covered entities and their business asso- ciates must do more than merely “check the  box”  on  cybersecurity  compliance.
If  an  organization  faces  an  OCR  investigation,  it  will  be  required  to  provide  information  related to its entire data privacy and security  program, not just information related to the  “incident”  that  triggered  the  investigation.
Often, organizations are required to provide  evidence  of  policies  and  procedures  going  back several years.
As  part  of  its  efforts  to  enforce  compli- ance with HIPAA, OCR conducted security  audits of covered entities in 2011 and 2012,  commonly referred to as Phase 1.
Although  Phase  2  was  delayed  until  OCR  imple- ments  a  web  portal  that  enables  covered  entities to submit information, in May 2015  OCR  began  sending  the  fi rst  surveys  of  Phase 2 audits, so covered entities and their  business associates should be prepared for  this  next  phase.
Similar  to  other  agencies,  OCR  intends  to  audit  the  cybersecurity  practices  of  the  organizations  that  fall  under  its  jurisdiction.
Risk  analysis  and  risk  management  (the   Security Rule)   ?
Notice  of  privacy  practices  and  access   rights (the Privacy Rule)  ¦  134    ?
Health care information is commonly con- sidered  the  most  sensitive  and  personal  information a consumer has, and it therefore  deserves  increased  security  controls.
Numerous  states  have  passed  laws  specifi - cally  intended  to  protect  personal  health  information,  regardless  of  whether  the  organization  holding  such  information  is  considered a “covered entity” under HIPAA.
As health care breaches continue to increase  in  number,  organizations  should  expect  greater regulatory scrutiny and activity relat- ed to their efforts to protect consumer health  information.
Various states have laws that affect  specifi c  industries  and  general  consumer  protection  laws  that  may  be  implicated  in  business practices.
Because  the  applicability  of  state  laws  affecting  consumers  and  because  cybersecurity  is  often  triggered  by  the  residence  of  the  consumer,  even  small  businesses can fi nd that they face unexpect- ed multijurisdictional questions.
¦  Recommendations and conclusion Given  the  wide  range  of  laws,  regulations,  and guidelines—only a few of which could  be  covered  here—how  do  organizations  begin to navigate these treacherous waters?
Organizations must build privacy and secu- rity  into  their  systems,  processes,  and  ser- vices from the ground up and from the top  down.
The  time  and  effort  required  to  assess  cyber  risk  and  understand  data  is  minimal  compared with the potential implications of  failing  to  do  so.
Technology  is  constantly  evolving,  which  means  cybersecurity  does   as well, and an organization’s efforts to pro- tect  consumer  information  must  similarly  adapt.
Organizations  must  face  cybersecurity  risks  as  an  enter- prise and leverage industry experts to guide  them through this quagmire of laws, regula- tions, and threats.
– Gus P. Coldebella, Principal  The cybertheft of intellectual property (IP) from U.S. com- panies has, in the words of former NSA director and Cyber  Command chief General Keith Alexander, resulted in the  “greatest  transfer  of  wealth  in  human  history.”  And  the  data bear that out: by some estimates, the value of IP stolen  from U.S. businesses over the Internet alone is $300 billion  per year—a whopping 6% of our $5 trillion total intellec- tual property assets.
For certain nations, cyber espionage is  a central component of their growth strategies: for exam- ple,  the  Report  of  the  Commission  on  the  Theft  of  U.S.
Intellectual  Property  (the  IP  Commission  Report)  found  that “national industrial policy goals in China encourage  IP theft, and an extraordinary number of Chinese in busi- ness and government entities are engaged in this practice.”  Cyber espionage of IP assets allows companies and coun- tries  to  circumvent  the  expense  and  hard  work  of  basic  research  and  product  development—which  could  take  years or even decades—and instead quickly pursue their  economic agendas based on stolen IP, all to the detriment  of U.S. businesses, jobs, and economic growth.
The hackers  are alleged to have penetrated the networks of important  American companies to acquire proprietary and confi den- tial  technical  and  design  specifi cations,  manufacturing  metrics, attorney-client discussions about upcoming trade  litigation, economic strategies, and other forms of sensi- tive, nonpublic information.
First, it sent a message to China:  that we are aware of this aberrant behavior—in which a  nation-state aims its espionage apparatus not at another  country, but at another country’s companies—and that the   137  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  U.S.  will  expose  this  misconduct  to  the  world.
Second,  the  indictment  sent  a  mes- sage  to  U.S.  companies  that,  although  past  breaches and legal and reputational risk may  have convinced boards and management to  shore  up  defenses  against  cyberattacks  involving  ‘personally  identifi able  informa- tion,’ or PII, the most sophisticated attackers  are interested in other, more mission-critical  data  on  companies’  networks—intellectual  property.
In  a  world  where  countries  persistently  attack companies and compromise of a com- pany’s  networks  seems  inevitable,  manage- ment may be tempted to throw up their hands  and  concede  defeat.
There  are,  however,  important legal and practical reasons to fi ght.
¦  Conducting a trade secrets risk analysis So  what  types  of  IP  are  cyber  spies  after?
A trade secret—according to the  Uniform Trade Secrets Act, or UTSA, adopted  in some form by 48 states and the District of  Columbia—is information that gains its actual  or  potential  economic  value  from  being  not  generally  known  and  reasonably  protected  from  disclosure.
But  air-gapped  trade secrets are rare in the Internet age.
Given  this, it is crucial for a company to identify and  locate  the  trade  secrets  on  its  networks,  and  those  that  are  being  deposited  there  in  the  ordinary course of business.
Finding them is a  key, and sometimes overlooked, part of a top- to-bottom  network  vulnerability  analysis.
Unless a company knows what trade secrets it  has  and  where  they  are  located,  it  cannot  begin to secure them.
Who may access them?
These questions and the protective  measures developed in response are not only  important  to  thwart  cyber  attackers—but  also  help  to  prevent  all  types  of  attempted  trade secret theft, whether conducted via the  Internet or the old-fashioned way.
One  of  the  central  questions  in  any  such  litigation  is: did the company make reasonable efforts  under  the  circumstances  to  protect  the  secrecy  of  its  confi dential  information?
The   reasonable measures identifi ed in these deci- sions—such as training employees on trade  secret protection, requiring employee confi - dentiality  agreements  prior  to  granting  access,  and  revoking  access  upon  termina- tion  from  the  company—apply  with  equal  force  in  the  cyber  context,  and  companies  should  employ  them.
¦  Planning for the worst Certain  adversaries—especially  nation- states and state-sponsored groups targeting  U.S.  trade  secrets—are  highly  skilled,  tech- nologically  savvy,  and  persistent.
Access controls and segmentation Companies  should  implement  access  con- trols on crown jewel data.
Although almost  every  employee  requires  access  to  certain  parts  of  the  company’s  network,  not  all  of  them  need  access  to  fi les  containing  trade  secrets.
Not even all employees that require  access to some trade secrets need access to all.
A smart access control system makes it clear  that secrets actually are treated as secrets— i.e.,  only  those  with  a  need  to  know  (as  opposed  to  everyone  with  a  network  pass- word) are given access to the data.
Another  related  layer  of  protection  is  ‘trade  secret  segmentation,’  which,  accord- ing to John Villasenor in his article Corporate  Cybersecurity Realism (Aug. 28, 2014), is dis- tributing  information  “so  that  no  single  cybersecurity  breach  exposes  enough  of  a  trade  secret  to  allow  the  attacker  to  obtain     PROTECTING TRADE SECRETS IN THE AGE OF CYBERESPIONAGE    the full set of information needed to replicate  a targeted invention, product, or service.” A  company  can  achieve  segmentation  in  two  ways detailed by Villasenor: fi rst, by divid- ing a trade secret into modules, distributing  the  modules  across  multiple  networks,  and  ensuring that there is no easy path from one  network  to  the  next;  and  second,  once  the  trade  secrets  are  broken  up  into  modules,  by  allowing  employees  access  only  to  the  modules  that  are  relevant  to  them.
Some  modules  can  be  separated  physically  and  allow  nearly  no  user  access.
For  example,  ‘negative  information’—valuable  secrets  about  what  does  not  work  and  is  often  the  result of meticulous collection of data through  extensive,  costly  research—is  not  frequently  accessed  in  a  company’s  day-to-day  opera- tions  and  therefore  can  be  segmented  and  stored in an extremely limited set of locations.
Implementing robust access control alongside  segmentation  makes  it  more  diffi cult  for  an  adversary  to  steal  a  company’s  crown  jewel  trade secrets in a single attack, and to ‘spear- phish’ its way into accessing some or all of a  company’s crown jewel data under the guise  of an authorized user.
Monitor data fl ow, not just authorization Instead of monitoring only for unauthorized  access,  companies  should  fl ag  and  investi- gate instances and activity of high-volume or  suspicious data transfers, whether or not the  transferor  is  ‘authorized.’  Systems  that  look  only  for  suspicious  behavior  by  unauthor- ized users can blind the company to critical  and  common  cyberattacks.
History  shows  that  trade  secret  theft  frequently  is  carried  out by authorized users—think about a dis- gruntled employee downloading the master  customer list, or the trading algorithm, right  before he or she quits to work for a competi- tor.
In  another  common  scenario,  when  hackers obtain privileged user credentials to  infi ltrate a company’s network, activity that  appears attributable to ‘Mike in Accounting’  may  actually  be  malicious.
139  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  Mark and tag secrets Even  in  the  bygone  days  of  trade  secrets  on paper, companies knew to clearly mark  their  secrets  with  a  legend.
Just  like  cartographers of old intentionally included  fake  shortcuts,  streets,  and  even  towns  to  immediately  recognize  misappropriated  copies of their maps, tagging digital assets  provides  a  way  to  defi nitively  prove  that  the IP was originally yours.
Today, with an  array of technological means at hand, com- panies  can  do  more,  including  tagging  digital IP with code that could, say, render  stolen fi les inoperable.
The IP Commission  Report  correctly  recommended  that  “pro- tection...be  undertaken  for  the  fi les  them- selves  and  not  just  the  network,  which  always has the ability to be compromised.”  It suggested that:  Companies  should  consider  marking  their  electronic  fi les  through  techniques  such  as  “meta-tagging,”  “beaconing,”  and “watermarking.” Such tools allow for  awareness of whether protected informa- tion  has  left  an  authorized  network  and  can  potentially  identify  the  location  of  fi les  in  the  event  that  they  are  stolen.
Additionally, software can be written that  will allow only authorized users to open  fi les  containing  valuable  information.
If  an  unauthorized  person  accesses  the  information, a range of actions might then  occur.
Collect forensic leads as part of incident response Of  course,  executives  must  make  sure  that  the  company  has  created  a  robust  incident  response  plan  and  has  practiced  and   ¦  140   exercised it.
It is also impor- tant—especially  with  potential  trade  secret  theft—to preserve all information surround- ing the incident in a forensically sound way.
For  example,  collecting  and  analyzing  log  information may allow a company to deter- mine what data were lifted and where they  were sent, which could be critical in investi- gations  by  law  enforcement  and  in  post- breach litigation.
Assume  the  worst  has  hap- pened, and you begin to see the company’s  hard work or research emerge in the mar- ketplace,  embedded  in  a  competitor’s  product  or  across  the  negotiating  table.
UTSA,   therefore,  allows  an  action  against  the  hacker and the company seeking to ben- efi t  from  the  stolen  trade  secrets,  if  the  plaintiff can show that the competitor had  reason  to  believe  that  the  data  it  was  using  were  stolen  from  someone  else’s  network.
UTSA  author- izes a court to award damages for actual  loss  and  unjust  enrichment,  including  multiple damages if the misappropriation  was  “willful  and  malicious.”  UTSA  §§  3(a); 3(b).
To sty- mie  competitors  that  import  their  prod- ucts  into  the  U.S.,  a  potent  option  is  to  initiate a process at the International Trade  Commission  (ITC)  under  Section  337  of  the  Tariff  Act  of  1930.
A  company  may  petition  the  ITC  to  investigate  whether  imported  goods  are  the  result  of  “unfair  methods of competition”—which includes  incorporating  stolen  trade  secrets—so  long  as  the  unfairness  has  the  potential  to  injure  or  destroy  a  domestic  industry.
Our experi- ence is that § 337 actions tend to be much  quicker  than  currently  available  alterna- tives,  including  state  and  federal  court  litigation.
Under  certain  circumstances,  the  CFAA  provides a private right of action for com- panies  to  bring  suit  against  a  party  who  knowingly  and  intentionally  accesses  a  protected  computer  without  authoriza- tion,  obtains  information,  and  causes  harm.
The victim may  be able to seek damages from not only the  individual  who  accessed  the  computer  and  stole  the  information  but  also  the  company  profi ting  from  the  stolen  trade  secret so long as the victim can plead and  prove that the competitor “conspire[d] to  commit”  such  an  offense  (18  U.S.C.
In addi- tion to imposing hefty fi nes ($5 million for  organizations, unless the theft was intend- ed  to  benefi t  a  foreign  government,  in  which case it is $10 million), the law also  allows  judges  to  force  the  criminals  to  forfeit “any property, or proceeds derived  from the stolen or misappropriated trade  secrets,  as  well  as  any  property  used  or  intended  to  be  used  to  help  steal  trade  secrets.” 18 U.S.C.
141  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  involving  federal   Of course, there are always pros and cons to  be  weighed  before  bringing  civil  litigation  or  law  enforcement  authorities.
There are also practical and busi- ness  considerations  that  may  argue  for  or  against such a suit, including its potential to  affect  existing  or  future  commercial  rela- tionships  and  continued  access  to  foreign  markets.
In  response  to  high-profi le  cyberattacks,  the President and the federal government  recognized that cyber espionage is a seri- ous  threat  to  the  nation’s  economy  and  national  security  but  acknowledged  that  it is not always possible to take criminal  or  civil  action  against  perpetrators  because  they  are  often  outside  the  juris- dictional  reach  of  U.S.  courts.
On April 1, 2015,  the  President  signed  Executive  Order  13694,  authorizing  the  Offi ce  of  Foreign  Assets  Control,  or  OFAC,  within  the  Treasury  Department,  to  (i)  identify  for- eign  hackers,  the  parties  who  aid  them,  and  the  parties  who  benefi t  from  their  activity by using their stolen information  to profi t and (ii) respond by freezing their   U.S. assets and imposing sanctions.
To earn a spot on the SDN list, the  associated  attack  has  to  be  “reasonably  likely to result in, or have materially con- tributed  to,  a  signifi cant  threat  to  the  national  security,  foreign  policy,  or  eco- nomic  health  or  fi nancial  stability  of  the  United  States.”  Although  OFAC  cannot  assist  a  company  with  recovering  lost  information  or  barring  products  from  entering the market, reporting the perpe- trators  of  particularly  serious  cyberat- tacks  to  OFAC  can  serve  as  a  powerful  deterrent.
¦  Conclusion Trade  secrets  are  high  on  the  list  of  assets  that  cyber  spies  are  interested  in  stealing.
¦  142   SecurityRoundtable.org  Cybersecurity due diligence in M&A  transactions: Tips for conducting  a robust and meaningful process Latham & Watkins LLP – Jennifer Archie, Partner  To begin with a tautology, when you buy a company, you  buy  their  data—and  the  attendant  risks  to  that  data.
Cybersecurity  risks  are  not  limited  to  consumer-facing  businesses,  whose  recent  losses  of  cardholder  or  patient  data grab news headlines.
Buyers should review  not just historic breaches but also cybersecurity risk man- agement.
Even though these risks are hard to quantify, the  analysis will inform deal terms, deal value, and post-deal  indemnity claims.
¦   First step: Get an early read on cyber readiness   at the engagement stage  Buyers  should  begin  all  cybersecurity  risk  assessments  early in the engagement process, with the goal of clearly  articulating  as  early  as  possible  the  target  company’s  most  important  information  assets,  systems,  and  busi- ness  processes.
Every  target  business  should  be  able  to  readily  identify  which  information  technology  (IT)  sys- tems and data sets are most valuable to the business and  explain  at  a  high  level  how  the  company  protects  and  exploits  them.
What  types  of  information  or  computer  systems  and  operations are most important to your business?
Where is sensitive information stored?
What are the most concerning threats to information,   networks, or systems?
143  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS   ?
What is the cybersecurity budget?
What  are  your  recovery  plans   if  critical  information  or  systems  become  unavailable?
If  the  front  line  deal-facing  personnel  respond, “I don’t know, I’d have to ask,” this  is a telling and interesting sign that the target  company’s security management program is  likely  not  well  integrated  into  the  senior  leadership ranks.
Sellers thus should be pre- pared  in  early  discussions  to  showcase  a  sophisticated understanding of data security  risks  and  how  those  risks  may  materially  affect the company’s operations, reputation,  and  legal  risks  (or  not).
A  buyer’s  key  dili- gence objective should be to probe and test  whether  the  target  company  has  imple- mented a mature risk management organiza- tion to evaluate the accuracy of management  assurances about lack of historical breaches,  payment  card  industry  (PCI)  compliance,  protections  against  competitor  or  insider  theft,  and  business  continuity.
¦   Tailor diligence to what types of information   are handled and how important is  information security to the bottom line  Beyond  these  general  questions,  the  buyer  should  directly  probe  whether  the  target  management  has  a  sophisticated  under- standing of potential cyber-related liabilities  and  the  regulatory  environment.
In  other  industries,  however,  exposure  to  costly   ¦  144   government investigations from the Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC)  or  other  agencies  may be poorly understood.
Investigations  are  expensive  and distracting, and may lead to a sweeping  10-  or  20-year  permanent  injunction  dictat- ing how future information security will be  managed  and  monitored.
After a breach, management is  often surprised to learn how persistent and  aggressive the FTC or state attorneys general  can be, even if the company sees itself as a  victim  of  harm,  not  a  perpetrator  of  con- sumer injury.
If the target’s legal or business  representatives are not knowledgeable about  the  regulatory  and  enforcement  environ- ments, buyers should not place much weight  on a seller’s lulling statements or assurances  that there have been no incidents or that risk  of a cyber event is low.
¦   Check for integrated cyber risk awareness   and mitigation and a comprehensive security  management program  Another sign of a mature security program  is a management team with cross-function- al  awareness  on  these  points  at  the  CEO  and board levels, as refl ected in board min- utes  or  other  documentation.
A  security  program  will  not  be  effective  if  it  is  a  silo  inside  the  IT  or  information  security  func- tions.
All  substantial  stakeholder  depart- ments should be involved in cybersecurity  risk  management,  including  business  unit  leaders,  legal,  internal  audit  and  compli- ance, fi nance, human resources, IT, and risk  management.
Diligence  questionnaires  should  ask  the  target company to generally summarize the  administrative, technical, and physical infor- mation security controls currently in place to  safeguard the most critical business data sets.
Such  controls  include  technical  measures  (such  as  boundary  and  malware  defense,  data encryption, intrusion detection systems,  anomalous  event  monitoring,  and  access  controls),  administrative  measures,  and     CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS    physical security.
The company should have  a  current  documented  crisis  management/ incident  response  plan  in  place,  including  pre-staging of legal and forensic experts and  a  public  relations  strategy,  all  approved  by  senior management.
A seller should specifi - cally inquire about and assess what fi nancial  resources are applied to data security, in the  context  of  the  target’s  overall  approach  to  risk containment and specifi c to its industry.
Also,  sellers  should  ask  the  following  to  gather  detailed  information  about  how  the  company has organized the management of  cybersecurity and risk:   ?
Have directors  and senior managers participated in data  security  training/been  involved  in  the  development of data security protocols?
Does  the  company  have  legal  counsel  regularly  advising  on  data  security  compliance?
internal  or  external, and if external, who?
How does the company educate and train  employees  and  vendors  about  company  policies,  information  security  risks,  and  necessary measures to mitigate risk?
How  can  employees  or  members  of  the  public  (such  as  independent  security  researchers) report potential vulnerabilities/ breaches,  including  irregular  activity  or  transactions?
If  the  company  has  in  the  last  year  or  two  completed  an  internal  or  external  audit  or  assessment  to  determine  compliance  with  company  security  policies  and/or  external  security standards, this should be requested,  or at a minimum the target company should  report  whether  all  recommendations  have   been  adopted,  budgeted  and  scheduled,  or  already implemented.
For companies whose vendors hold com- pany-sensitive  data  or  access  systems,  the  company should have implemented—prior  to  engaging  in  a  business  relationship—a  formal  vendor  management  program  that  specifi cally  assesses  risk  and  identifi es  potential security or data privacy concerns  and  appropriate  remediation  next  steps.
After  a  decision  to  engage,  the  company  should mitigate data security risks through  written agreements and supervision.
These  third  parties  should  have  data  security  insurance coverage and/or the agreements  should require such a party to defend and  indemnify the target company for legal lia- bility arising from any release or disclosure  of the information resulting from the negli- gence  of  the  vendor  or  other  third  party.
Third-party  agreements  involving  data  exchange  or  access  also  should  articulate  breach notifi cation procedures, cooperation  levels,  information  sharing,  and  expressly  assign  incident  control  and  reporting  responsibilities.
Cloud-based  or  other  software-as-a- solution (SAAS) solutions as well as mobile  devices present their own cybersecurity risks  and  should  not  be  overlooked  in  diligence.
Does  it  rely  on  SAAS  solutions  for  critical  or  other  business  needs  such  as  contact  relationship  management  or  HR?
How  are  the  security  and  compliance  risks  presented  being  managed?
Companies  that  issue  or  support mobile devices should have policies  and procedures in place designed to protect  sensitive information in those environments.
¦   Use subject matter experts to assess cyber   readiness and liabilities  Given  the  importance  of  the  above  ques- tions,  the  buyer  should  pay  careful  atten- tion to who asks these questions on behalf  of  the  buyer  or  underwriters,  in  what  set- tings,  and  with  what  time  allowances.
Put  simply,  deal  teams  ideally  should  embed  subject matter experts on the business side,     145  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  the  technical  side,  and  even  the  legal  side  early on—to do the following:   ?
Review and advise on deal terms or costs  to  remediate  gaps  in  compliance  or  risk  management.
Very importantly, the deal team also must be  nimble and focused upon the specifi c indus- try,  because  cybersecurity  risks  are  highly  variable  across  industry  sectors;  threats,  liabilities,  and  government  expectations  for  adequate  security  are  evolving  constantly.
Expenditures  include the following:   ?
Costs to investigate, contain, and remediate  damaged networks and payment systems  and to upgrade security   ?
¦   For retail sector, diligence surrounding  PCI compliance should seek more than  a “yes” or “no” response  Buyers  of  companies  who  accept,  process,  store,  or  handle  cardholder  payment  data  streams of course will want to pay particular  attention  to  compliance  with  current  PCI  standards.
At Home Depot, for example, an  attacker  used  a  vendor’s  username  and  password  to  gain  access  to  Home  Depot’s   ¦  146   network.
The attacker then acquired elevat- ed rights that allowed it to navigate portions  of  the  company’s  systems  and  to  deploy  unique, custom-built malware on self-check- out  systems  to  access  the  payment  card  information  of  up  to  56  million  customers  who  shopped  at  U.S.  and  Canadian  stores  between April 2014 and September 2014.
What  this  sort  of  fi nancial  and  reputa- tional  exposure  means  for  M&A  diligence  within the retail sector is that buyers should  devote expert and highly substantive atten- tion  to  how  cardholder  data  are  collected,  stored, handled, and secured.
PCI compliance handled correctly is costly  and  involves  constant  adaptation  and  opti- mization to new threats and new standards.
Within the data security space—as was true  for Home Depot, Target, and many others— good business practice assumes that a com- promised  merchant  will  have  a  recent,  valid,  self-certifi cation  or  even  third-party  certifi cation  of  PCI  compliance.
Accordingly,  the  buyer  should  always  test  the  security  of  cardholder  data  independently,  at  a  process     CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS    level if necessary.
The same security consult- ants  who  arrive  post-breach  to  assess  root  cause and damage can examine card-related  data security very meaningfully in the M&A  setting, even with only a few days of on-site  interviews  and  document  collection.
If  PCI  compliance concerns arise in diligence, deal  terms  can  be  arranged  that  mandate  and  appropriate  funding  for  third-party  inde- pendent assessments and implementation of  recommendations.
Moreover, many retailers  now are migrating to new payment systems,  and this is a unique technology risk because  of the likelihood of delay, interruptions, and  budgetary over-runs.
¦   Understand and assess awareness   and mitigation of risks of trade secret  theft, nation-state espionage, and denial  of service attacks  Beyond payment card security risks, theft of  trade  secrets  by  competitors  and  insiders,  state-sponsored espionage that is exploited  for  economic  advantage,  and  cyberattacks  that  disable  or  cripple  corporate  networks  are less publicized but can be equally dam- aging to a target business.
For example, the  high-profi le,  studio-wide  cyberattack  at  Sony  Pictures  in  November  2014  at  the  hands  of  a  group  calling  itself  #GOP,  aka  the  Guardians  of  Peace,  starkly  illustrates  the  potential  to  cripple  a  business.
The  attack,  which  the  FBI  attributed  to  North  Korea,  resulted  in  the  theft  of  terabytes  of  company  internal  email  and  documents,  release of unreleased movies to fi le-sharing  networks, deletion of documents from Sony  computers,  threatening  messages  to  the  company  and  individual  employees,  theft  and  apparent  exploitation  of  sensitive  human resources data, and a near complete  and prolonged disruption of the company’s  ability  to  transact  business  and  communi- cate  electronically  over  its  networks  and  systems.
In  an  interview  with  CBS  News,  Sony’s  outside  cyber  investigator,  Kevin  Mandia, disclosed that 3,000 computers and  800 servers were wiped, and 6,000 employ- ees were “given a taste of living offl ine”—no   email  and  no  way  to  process  employee  benefi ts or time cards (Source: http://www.
In  DuPont  v.  Kolon  (United  States  v.  Kolon  Industries,  Inc.  et  al.
),  for  example,  the  manufacturer of Heracron, a competitor prod- uct  to  DuPont’s  Kevlar,  misappropriated  DuPont’s  confi dential  information  by  hiring  former DuPont employees as consultants and  pressuring them to reveal Kevlar-related trade  secrets.
Are  there  former  employees  who  had  access  to  critical  intellectual  property  or  other  company  confi dential  information  who have recently left for competitors?
What  agreements  are  in  place  to  protect   the proprietary information they have?
According  to  the  FBI,  between  2009  and  2013,  the  number  of  arrests  related  to  economic  espionage  and  theft  of  trade  secrets—which  the  FBI’s     147  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  Economic Espionage Unit oversees—at least  doubled, indictments more than tripled, and  convictions  increased  sixfold.
The  indictment,  fi led  May  1,  2014,  alleges  that  the  defendants  obtained  unauthorized  access to trade secrets and internal commu- nications of the affected companies for the  benefi t  of  Chinese  companies,  including  state-owned  enterprises.
Some  defendants  allegedly  hacked  directly—stealing  sensi- tive,  nonpublic,  and  deliberative  emails  belonging  to  senior  decision  makers,  as  well  as  technical  specifi cations,  fi nancial  information, network credentials, and stra- tegic  information  in  corporate  documents  and  emails—while  others  offered  support  through infrastructure management.
During  the  past  three  years,  have  you  experienced an interruption or suspension  of  your  computer  system  for  any  reason  (not  including  downtime  for  planned  maintenance) that exceeded four hours?
A buyer should assess a target’s measures to  prevent and detect insider threats, including  whether  basic  protections  are  in  place  to  identify and mitigate insider threats, such as  the following:   ?
Internal network security measures such  as  website  monitoring,  blocking  access  to free (unauthorized) cloud-storage sites  such as Dropbox, turning off USB drives   ?
Automated  monitoring  of  Web,  deep  Web,  or  peer-to-peer  network  searching  for leaked data.
What  measures  does  it  have  in  place  to   data (wherever stored)?
Has your network suffered an intrusion?
¦  148     CYBERSECURITY DUE DILIGENCE IN M&A TRANSACTIONS: TIPS FOR CONDUCTING A ROBUST AND MEANINGFUL PROCESS    ¦   Assessing cyber insurance Finally,  buyers  should  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  cyber  risks  are  mitigated  by  insurance  coverage,  including  whether  enhancements to the cyber program may be  available  post-closing.
Most  cyber  insur- ance  policies  today  cover  the  data  breach  and  privacy  crisis  management  expenses  associated with complying with data breach  notifi cation  laws.
Those  costs  include  the  costs of expert legal, communications, and  forensic  advisors,  benefi ts  such  as  credit  repair  or  monitoring  to  affected  individu- als, and even costs of responding to govern- ment investigations or paying fi nes.
Cyber  coverage is also widely available for extor- tion events, defacement of website, infringe- ment,  and  network  security  events,  even  arising  from  theft  of  data  on  third-party  systems  or  malicious  acts  by  employees.
Because  of  the  volatility  and  variability  of  the  cyber  insurance  market  at  this  time,   buyers  should  closely  examine  policies  for  what is covered, deductibles, coverage peri- ods,  and  limits.
Expertise  in  assessing  data-driven  risks  should  be  embedded on the front end of every transac- tion  and  tracked  throughout  the  deal,  so  that deal terms, deal value, and post-closing  opportunities  to  strengthen  security  can  be  considered  against  a  fully  developed  factual  picture  of  the  target  company’s  cyber readiness and exposure.
SecurityRoundtable.org     149  ¦  International infl ection point— companies, governments,  and rules of the road Kaye Scholer LLP – Adam Golodner, Partner  In  the  attorney  general’s  conference  room  at  the  United  States Department of Justice is a mural on the ceiling—on  one end a heavenly depiction of justice granted, and on  the  other  a  depressing  tableau  of  justice  denied.
We are at this kind of infl ection point in global  cyber.
Technology, software, hardware, and physical and  social networks are embedded everywhere today.
Into the  future  the  Internet  of  Things  and  the  Industrial  Internet  will  bring  the  next  wave  of  global  hyper  connectedness  and  drive  business  innovation,  new  markets,  effi ciency,  and consumer benefi ts globally.
Every business today is a  technology  business,  and  every  society  increasingly  a  technology society.
In some sense, cyber issues are not new.
But cyber presents  new  facts.
The  kind of information we collect is quantitatively and quali- tatively  different  than  the  past.
Countries  and  companies  have  to  defi ne  acceptable  ‘rules  of  the  road’  for  behavior  in  cyberspace—what’s  okay  and  not  okay for governments to do to each other, companies, and   151  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  individuals  in  cyberspace.
After  all,  technology is a tool; we have had tools in the  past, and we have applied age-old principles  to  new  tools  throughout  history.
What  principles  and  rules  will  secure  goodness  into the global technology future?
There are three areas in which companies  and their leaders can help: rules of the road,  cyber laws globally, and security and privacy.
¦  Rules of the road Cyber is a top issue for the U.S., E.U.
For  the  last  three  years  the  U.S.  has  said  that  cyber  is  the  number  one  national  security threat to the U.S.—not nuclear, bio- logic, or chemical, but cyberthreat.
All these  countries  view  cyber  as  a  national  security  and economic security issue.
In national secu- rity, cyber is both an offensive and a defensive  issue.
On the offensive side, cyber tools and  techniques can be a means of espionage, war,  or  deterring  a  threat.
Although some policy makers have begun  to  talk  about  cyber  ‘norms,’  there  has  not  been sustained multi-lateral head-of-state to  head-of-state  work  to  set  rules  of  the  road.
Of  course, other countries, such as China, could  join in short order if it turns out they are in  fast agreement, but the work of building out  the core should move ahead without waiting  for everyone to be on board.
First,  companies own the enterprise networks and     INTERNATIONAL INFLECTION POINT—COMPANIES, GOVERNMENTS, AND RULES OF THE ROAD   databases  in  which  cyber  activity  takes  place—domestic companies and global com- panies.
Companies own the software, hard- ware, the information, and the upstream and  downstream relationships where this contest  takes place.
Although cyber is the fi fth fi ghting  domain (along with land, sea, air, and space),  it is the only one owned essentially by pri- vate  companies.
Second,  information  tech- nology  and  communications  services  and  products are created and sold by the private  sector.
Third,  the  future  of  the  global  interoperable,  open,  secure,  network is at stake.
What cyber activity is an  act of war?
What cyber activity is acceptable  espionage?
What  is  cyber  vandalism,  and  what  is  the  appropriate  response?
What action  is  acceptable  to  proactively  stop  a  planned  cyber  activity?
What  principles  should  ani- mate the decision to use a cyber tool of war  on  a  target  connected  to  the  Internet?
Is  it  OK to deliver cyber means through private  networks or technologies?
What is an accept- able response to another country’s cyber or  kinetic act?
How can  we  make  global  assurance  methodologies  such as the Common Criteria for Information  Technology  Security  Evaluation  (Common  Criteria)  for  products  even  more  useful?
Should  there  be  requirements  for  govern- ments to share cyberthreat information with  other  countries  and  companies  to  improve   security?
Is  it  OK  for  national security services to steal intellectual  property  of  companies?
What  collection  of  information  of  or  about  individual  citizens  of  another  country  is  acceptable  or  unacceptable?
What  is  the  standard?
Most  of  these  questions  have  some  grounding in existing principles and laws,  but  the  cyber  facts  have  to  be  understood  and  applied  to  start  to  enunciate  these  rules  of  the  road.
Although  work  has  cer- tainly begun on cyber ‘norms,’ the time is  right for taking the work to the next level.
Furthermore,  because  the  playing  fi eld  is  made up of private networks and elements  of  technology  services  and  products,  the  outcomes should by defi nition be of inter- est  to  companies,  CEOs,  and  boards  of  directors.
Good  rules  of  the  road  should  help build trust in networks and technolo- gy  globally.
¦  Cyber laws globally Given  that  cyber  runs  the  gamut  from  national security concerns to consumer pro- tection,  and  countries  around  the  world  have  different  values  and  interpretation  of  what laws protect their country and citizens,  it should come as no surprise that companies  doing business globally will face a myriad of  sometimes  divergent  laws  on  a  range  of  cyber topics.
With  regard  to  compliance  and  security,  there  is  a  saying  that  ‘compliance  does  not  equal security.’ There is no doubt that driving     153  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  to ‘real security’ is the goal, and one that will  likely get you where you need to be for com- pliance as well.
infrastructure security: voluntary public- private partnerships (U.S., U.K.), regulation  of  critical  infrastructure  (China,  pending  in  E.U.,  pending  in  Germany),  sector- specifi c  regulation  (India  telecoms,  U.S.  chemical, Russia strategic industries)   ?
tort,  contract,  product  liability:  in  the  absence of specifi c regulation, a company  must  use  ‘reasonable  care’  to  secure  their  and  third-party  data,  continue  to  provide  service,  build  secure  products,  and  protect  IP  (U.S.,  E.U.,  India  and  for  contract, globally)   ?
board  of  directors  corporate:  the  board  must use its ‘business judgment’ to secure  the  assets  of  the  company  and  provide  reasonable security (U.S.)   ?
acquisition  of  information  by  nation- states:  lawful  intercept  telecoms  (most  countries), requests from non-telecoms by  judicial  or  administrative  process  (most  countries),  collection  outside  of  home  country (most countries)   ?
technology  controls,  national  security  reviews,  and  certifications:  export  control  commercial  technologies  (U.S.),  export  control  of  military  technologies  ITAR  (U.S.),  certifi cation  of  IT  product  (26 countries Common Criteria evaluation,  China  own  requirements,  Russia  own  requirements,  Korea  pending),  import  restriction on encryption (China, Russia),  in-country  use  of  encryption  (China,  Russia),  national  security  reviews  for  M&A (U.S. CFIUS & FCC, China).
privacy:   economy-wide   limits  on  collection  and  transfer  of  information  about  individuals  (E.U.
privacy information to U.S.)   ?
consumer protection: unfair or deceptive   security practices (U.S. FTC)   ?
criminal   law:   laws  against  hacking  (U.S.  CFAA,  Budapest  Convention  on  Cyber  Crime,  many  countries),  mutual  legal assistance (MLATs) (U.S. and many  countries  for  cross-border  investigation  and extradition)  technologies,    ?
multilateral  agreements:  Wassenaar  arrangement  (obligation  to  limit  export  of  dual-use  including  security),  mutual  defense  treaties  (e.g.,  NATO  and  Article  5  cyber  obligations),  WTO  and  technical  barriers  to  trade  agreement  (obligation  of  WTO  members  to  use  international  standards,  including  technology), WTO government procurement  agreements (many countries, rules opening  government  procurement  markets  for  foreign tech products).
Over the past decade there have been many  skirmishes to try to limit the impact of pro- posed  laws  that  would  splinter  the  global  market for technology products and servic- es  and  protect  the  ability  of  companies  to  continue  to  drive  innovation  in  products  and  services.
Particularly  in  the  post- Snowden  world,  where  trust  of  countries  and technologies has been strained, compa- nies must pay particular attention to legis- lative and regulatory proposals that would  undermine  the  global  interoperability  or  security of the network, or use security as a  stalking horse to protect or promote domes- tic manufacturers.
¦  Security and privacy As  technology  and  economics  continues  to  drive connectivity, cloud, mobility, data ana- lytics,  the  Internet  of  Things,  and  the  Industrial Internet, we must deal effectively  with  security  and  privacy.
People  are  still  working     INTERNATIONAL INFLECTION POINT—COMPANIES, GOVERNMENTS, AND RULES OF THE ROAD   through what they think about security and  privacy.
In the U.S., we limit what the  government  can  do  through  Constitutional  Fourth  Amendment  restrictions  on  unrea- sonable searches and seizures, but we freely  give  personal  information  to  commercial  companies in exchange for free content and  other  services  we  like.
presumptively  limits  what information relating to individuals the  private sector can collect and share but often  has  minimal  legal  procedures  regulating  government activities to collect information  about its citizens.
China has its own view on  national  security  and  information,  as  does  Russia.
In  any  event,  companies  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  the  future  of  the  intersection of security and privacy.
Most  people  talk  in  terms  of  balancing  security  and  privacy.
I think the better approach is to  drive to security and privacy.
Do what you need to secure a system  or  crown  jewels  or  an  enterprise,  and  use  techniques  and  technologies  that  help  ensure privacy.
How  can  we  work  effectively with anonymized data?
How can  we implement machine-to-machine anoma- ly  detection  without  identifying  the  indi- vidual or that a device belongs to a particu- lar  individual?
Can  we  know  enough from encrypted data streams across  the enterprise or network to understand and  stop  an  exfi ltration  or  an  attack?
How  can  we  share  cyberthreat  information  that  is  anonymous  and  actionable?
¦  Conclusion Cyber is by defi nition a global issue for any  company,  CEO,  and  board.
The  company’s  networks  are  global,  products  are  global,  and adversaries are global.
Where the  cyber issue is in the top of the mind in each  of the major markets these companies serve  and where governments have not yet sorted  out acceptable global ‘rules of the road,’ it is  incumbent  on  company  leadership  to  help  fi gure  out  what  the  future  is  going  to  look  like.
Without common ground about what’s  OK and not OK for governments to do with  regard  to  each  other,  companies,  and  citi- zens,  we  will  face  an  uncertain  technology  future.
I am optimistic about the future and  about  the  ability  to  master  the  cyber  issue.
We are at an infl ection point— as we continue to embed devices, software,  and  hardware  into  everything,  we  need  to  have a view, a path, a structure that gives us  confi dence.
Therefore, when we sit down in  an offi ce such as the attorney general’s or a  board of directors and ponder the better and  lesser  proclivities  of  mankind,  we  must  be  confi dent  we  are  driving  rules-based  deci- sions to the happier side of the ledger—one  that  ensures  we  reap  the  benefi ts  of  this  terrifi c, accelerating, age of technology.
SecurityRoundtable.org     155  ¦  Managing third-party liability  using the SAFETY Act Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP – Brian Finch, Partner  One of the most pressing questions directors and offi cers  of publicly listed companies is how to manage third-party  liability in the post 9/11 era.
In particular, directors and  offi cers  continually  struggle  with  the  issue  of  whether  ‘enough’ security measures have been deployed to protect  not only corporate assets and employees but also innocent  bystanders.
In  that  particular  case,  the  Port  Authority was held to a standard in which if it knew or  should  have  been  aware  of  the  possibility  of  a  terrorist  attack, then it was obligated to take all reasonable meas- ures necessary to mitigate the possibility of said attacks.
In  that  instance,  a  federal  court  in  New  York  allowed  claims alleging that the cockpit doors on planes made by  Boeing  were  negligently  designed—thereby  allowing   157  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  terrorists  to  gain  control  of  the  planes— were allowed to proceed.
Based on  a  review  of  existing  statutes,  regulations,  and  alternative  options  such  as  insurance  coverage,  the  best  opportunity  for  limiting  liability  is  the  Support  Anti-Terrorism  By  Fostering  Effective  Technologies  Act  (‘SAFETY  Act’).
Under  the  SAFETY  Act,  ‘sellers’  of  security  products  or  services  (a  term  that  also  includes  companies  that  develop their own physical or cybersecurity  plans  and  procedures  and  then  uses  them  only  for  internal  purposes)  are  eligible  to   ¦  158   receive  SAFETY Act.
liability  protections  under  the   In  addition,  entities  that  purchase  or  deploy SAFETY Act approved security prod- ucts and/or services also will have the ben- efi t  of  immediate  dismissal  of  third-party  liability  claims  arising  out  of,  related  to,  or  resulting  from  a  declared  ‘act  of  terrorism’  (a term that encompasses physical or cyber- attacks,  regardless  of  whether  there  is  any  motive or intent that could be deemed ‘polit- ical’ in nature).
Accordingly, this article is based on inter- pretations of the SAFETY Act, the Final Rule  implementing  the  SAFETY  Act,  and  the  underlying  theory  of  the  government  con- tractor defense.
¦   Background of the SAFETY Act The SAFETY Act provides extensive liability  protections to entities that are awarded either  a  ‘Designation’  or  a  ‘Certifi cation’  as  a  Qualifi ed Anti-Terrorism Technology (QATT).
Under  a  ‘Designation’  award,  successful  SAFETY Act  QATT  applications  are  entitled  to a variety of liability protections, including  the following:   ?
Compensatory  damages  are  capped  at  an amount agreed to by the Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  and  the  applicant.
This  presumption  of  immunity  can  be  overcome in two ways: (1) by demonstrat- ing that the application was submitted with  incorrect information and that that informa- tion  was  provided  though  fraud  or  willful  misconduct  or  (2)  by  showing  that  the  claims asserted by the plaintiff related to a  product or service are not encompassed by  the  QATT  defi nition  as  written  by  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security.
For the SAFETY Act protections to be trig- gered,  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security  must  declare  that  an  “act  of  terrorism”  has  occurred.
The defi nition of an “act of terror- ism”  is  extremely  broad,  and  includes  any  act that:  (i) is unlawful;  (ii)  causes  harm  to  a  person,  property,  or  entity, in the United States, or in the case of a  domestic United States air carrier or a United  States-fl ag vessel (or a vessel based principally  in the United States on which United States  income tax is paid and whose insurance cover- age  is  subject  to  regulation  in  the  United  States), in or outside the United States; and  (iii) uses or attempts to use instrumentalities,  weapons or other methods designed or intend- ed to cause mass destruction, injury or other     MANAGING THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY USING THE SAFETY ACT    loss  to  citizens  or  institutions  of  the  United  States.
A cursory review of this defi nition reveals  that there is no need to divine a motivation  for the attack and that the language used can  be interpreted to include physical attacks as  well  as  cyberattacks.
¦   SAFETY Act protections available   to customers and other entities  One of the most signifi cant additional bene- fi ts  of  the  SAFETY  Act  is  that  the  liability  protections  awarded  to  the  seller  of  the  QATT  fl ow  down  to  customers,  suppliers,  subcontractors,  vendors,  and  others  who  were involved in the development or deploy- ment  of  the  QATT.
In  other  words,  when  a  company  buys  or  otherwise  uses  a  QATT  that has been either SAFETY Act ‘Designated’  or  ‘Certifi ed,’  that  customer  is  entitled  to  immediate  dismissal  of  claims  associated  with the use of the approved technology or  service  and  arising  out  of,  related  to,  or  resulting from a declared act of terrorism.
The bases for these expanded protections  are clearly set forth in the SAFETY Act stat- ute and in the Final Rule implementing the  SAFETY Act.
Both are detailed below:  With respect to the protections offered to  entities other than the Seller of the QATT,  the SAFETY Act statute states as follows:  IN  GENERAL.—There  shall  exist  a  Federal cause of action for claims arising  out of, relating to, or resulting from an act  of terrorism when qualifi ed anti-terrorism     159  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  technologies  have  been  deployed  in  defense  against  or  response  or  recovery  from  such  act  and  such  claims  result  or  may result in loss to the Seller.
The sub- stantive  law  for  decision  in  any  such  action  shall  be  derived  from  the  law,  including choice of law principles, of the  State  in  which  such  acts  of  terrorism  occurred, unless such law is inconsistent  with  or  preempted  by  Federal  law.
Such  Federal cause of action shall be brought only  for  claims  for  injuries  that  are  proximately  caused  by  sellers  that  provide  qualifi ed  anti- terrorism  technology  to  Federal  and  non- Federal government customers.
The SAFETY Act statute also reads:  JURISDICTION.—Such appropriate district  court of the United States shall have original  and exclusive jurisdiction over all actions for  any claim for loss of property, personal injury,  or death arising out of, relating to, or result- ing  from  an  act  of  terrorism  when  qualifi ed  anti-terrorism technologies have been deployed  in  defense  against  or  response  or  recovery  from such act and such claims result or may  result in loss to the Seller.
Section 442(a)(1), states that the claims  arising out of, relating to, or resulting from  an act of terrorism “shall be brought only for  claims  for  injuries  that  are  proximately  caused by sellers that provide qualifi ed anti- terrorism  technology  to  Federal  and  non- Federal government customers.”  Furthermore,  in  Section  442(a)(2),  the  SAFETY  Act  states  that  U.S.  district  courts  shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction  for claims that “result or may result in loss to  the seller.”  The language in 6 U.S.C.
First and foremost, the  Act  unequivocally  states  that  a  “cause  of  action  shall  be  brought  only  for  claims  for  injuries that are proximately caused by sellers  that provide qualifi ed anti-terrorism technol- ogy.”  Second,  if  the  Seller  of  the  Qualifi ed  Anti-Terrorism Technology at issue were not  the only defendant, would-be plaintiffs could,  in  an  effort  to  circumvent  the  statute,  bring  claims (arising out of or relating to the perfor- mance  or  non-performance  of  the  Seller’s  Qualifi ed Anti-Terrorism Technology) against  arguably  less  culpable  persons  or  entities,  including but not limited to contractors, sub- contractors,  suppliers,  vendors,  and  custom- ers of the Seller of the technology.
Because  the  claims  in  the  cause  of  action  would  be  predicated  on  the  performance  or  non-performance  of  the  Seller’s  Qualifi ed  Anti-Terrorism  Technology,  those  persons  or  entities,  in  turn,  would  fi le  a  third-party  action  against  the  Seller.
The  Department  believes  Congress  did  not  intend through the Act to increase rather than  decrease the amount of litigation arising out  of  or  related  to  the  deployment  of  Qualifi ed  Anti-Terrorism Technology.
Rather, Congress  balanced the need to provide recovery to plain- tiffs  against  the  need  to  ensure  adequate  deployment of anti-terrorism technologies by  creating a cause of action that provides a cer- tain level of recovery against Sellers, while at  the same time protecting others in the supply  chain.
Within the Final Rule itself, the Department  also stated:  There shall exist only one cause of action for  loss of property, personal injury, or death for  performance  or  non-performance  of  the   Seller’s Qualifi ed Anti-Terrorism Technology  in  relation  to  an  Act  of  Terrorism.
Such  cause of action may be brought only against  the  Seller  of  the  Qualifi ed  Anti-Terrorism  Technology and may not be brought against  the buyers, the buyers’ contractors, or down- stream  users  of  the  Technology,  the  Seller’s  suppliers or contractors, or any other person  or entity.
Thus, the SAFETY Act statute and the Final  Rule implementing the law make it clear that  when there is litigation involving a SAFETY  Act QATT (whether Designated or Certifi ed)  alleging that the QATT was the cause, direct- ly  or  indirectly,  of  any  alleged  losses,  the  only  proper  defendant  in  such  litigation  is  the Seller of the QATT.
¦   Practical application of SAFETY Act   protections to limit third-party claims  Considering  the  above,  companies  that  sell  or  deploy  security  QATTs,  as  well  as  their  customers, are entitled to extensive benefi ts.
Sellers of cybersecurity QATTs are entitled to  the broad protections from third-party liabil- ity claims offered under a ‘Designation’ and  a ‘Certifi cation.’  As explicitly set forth in the SAFETY Act  statute and the SAFETY Act Final Rule, the  only proper defendant in litigation following  an  act  of  terrorism  allegedly  involving  a  SAFETY  Act  Designated  and/or  Certifi ed  QATT  is  the  seller  itself.
In  this  case,  the  ‘Seller’  would  be  the  security  vendor  or  company  that  deploys  its  own  internally  developed  security  policies,  procedures,  or  technologies  with  the  QATT  being  said  Certifi ed  or  Designated  security  policies,  procedures, or even technologies.
The basis for this analysis rests upon the  fact that sellers of security QATTs will have  received  the  QATT  Designation  or  Certifi cation,  thus  conferring  upon  them  specific  statutory  liability  protections.
MANAGING THIRD-PARTY LIABILITY USING THE SAFETY ACT    Further, based on the extensive analysis con- ducted above regarding the applicability of  the SAFETY Act statute and Final Rule, buy- ers  of  security  QATTs  will  be  considered  ‘customers’  for  SAFETY  Act  purposes,  and  therefore entitled to immediate dismissal of  claims related to an approved security tech- nology or service.
QATT  customers  and  sellers could still face security-related litiga- tion should the Homeland Security Secretary  not declare the attack to be an “act of terror- ism”  or  if  the  claims  do  not  relate  to  the  QATT as defi ned by DHS.
Users of SAFETY Act-approved security  products or services will also receive direct  and tangible benefi ts.
A  wide  variety  of  attacks,  products,  and  services,  including  cyberattacks and cybersecurity products and  services, are covered by the language of the  SAFETY  Act,  and  thus,  such  products  and  services are also eligible to provide dramati- cally limited litigation and for such litigation  to be limited to ‘sellers,’ not ‘customers.’  Certainly  not  every  attack  will  result  in  liability for security vendors or their custom- ers,  particularly  with  respect  to  third-party  liability.
Perhaps  most  importantly  for  directors  and offi cers of publicly listed companies, the  SAFETY  Act  should  always  be  considered     161  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  when  examining  risk  mitigation  strategies  associated with the company’s internal secu- rity  programs  (physical  and/or  cyber)  as  well  as  security  goods  and  services  pur- chased  from  outside  vendors.
The  SAFETY  Act offers powerful liability protections and  can doubly serve as evidence that the com- pany  exercised  ‘due  diligence’  and  ‘reason- able  care’  when  designing  and  implement- ing its security programs.
Given  the  relative  paucity  of  case  law  defi ning what constitutes ‘adequate’ or ‘rea- sonable’  security,  directors  and  offi cers  should look to the SAFETY Act as a way to  help  determine  whether  their  company’s  security  plans  and  programs  could  be  con- sidered to have achieved those benchmarks.
Doing so will not only help improve security  but also almost assuredly decrease the com- pany’s risk exposure.
¦  162   SecurityRoundtable.org  Combating the insider threat:  Reducing security risks from  malicious and negligent employees Littler Mendelson P.C.
– Philip L. Gordon, Esq., Co-Chair,  Privacy and Background Checks Practice Group  “Edward Snowden,” the affair that bears his name dem- onstrates the extreme damage that a privileged insider  can cause, even to an organization with the most sophis- ticated security technology and one of the largest cyber- security budgets.
Although Snowden may have been a  contractor,  survey  after  survey  demonstrates  that  employees,  whether  through  negligence  or  malice,  are  the most common cause of security incidents.
According  to  the  Vormetric  Insider  Threat  Report  2015,  89%  of  respondents globally stated that their organization was  more at risk than ever from the insider threat, and 55%  identifi ed  employees  as  the  #1  internal  threat.
PwC’s  Global  State  of  Information  Security  2015  found  that  current employees are the most frequently cited cause of  security  incidents,  well  ahead  of  contractors,  hackers,  organized crime, and nation-states.
Just as PwC’s study  found  in  2015,  a  2013  Ponemon  Institute  study,  entitled  the “Post-Breach Boom,” also reported that negligent and  malicious  insiders  were  the  cause  of  61%  of  security  breaches  experienced  by  respondents,  substantially  exceeding other causes, such as external attacks and sys- tem error or malfunctions.
Between  those  endpoints,  employers  can  reduce the insider threat by implementing and managing  access controls, securing mobile devices (whether employ- er-owned or personal) used for work, carefully managing  remote work, providing effective training, and following a  myriad other steps discussed in more detail below.
163  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  ¦   Pre-employment screening and post-hire   risk alerts  Effective background screening can eliminate  the  insider  threat  before  it  ever  occurs  by  identifying  job  applicants  who  pose  a  threat  to the employer’s information assets.
Employers that rely on staffi ng compa- nies  should  consider  not  hiring  temporary  workers  for  positions  involving  access  to  sensitive  employee,  customer,  or  business  data, such as positions in the human resourc- es or R&D departments or those responsible  for processing credit card payments.
Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  (EEOC)  has  fi led  several  lawsuits  against  large  employers,  alleging  that  their  pre-employment  screen- ing  practices  have  a  disparate  impact  on  African  American  and  Hispanic  job  appli- cants.
Consequently,  organizations  should  carefully  review  their  pre-employment  screening practices for compliance with the  many federal, state, and local laws aimed at  helping ex-offenders secure employment.
Employers may consider using such “con- tinuous monitoring” services to help iden- tify  employees  who  become  security  risks  over time.
¦   Employee-oriented safeguards for sensitive   corporate data  Even employees who have been thoroughly  screened and have proven their trustworthi- ness  can  expose  an  organization’s  sensitive  data  to  loss  or  theft.
Organizations  and  the  employees  themselves  can  take  the  basic  precautions  described  below  to  mitigate  these risks.
A.  Safeguarding electronic data  information.
Access control lists: Restricting access  to  information,  particularly  sensitive  customer,  employee,  and  business  information, on a need-to-know basis is  a fundamental principle of information  security.
Employees  in  the  accounts  payable  department,  for  example,  should  be  barred  from  accessing  human  resources  In  addition,  access  to  information  by  employees with a need to know should  be  limited  to  the  minimum  necessary  to  perform  their  job  responsibilities.
Organizations  implement  a  process  for  establishing  the  access  rights  of  new  hires  based  on  their  job  responsibilities,  for  modifying  access rights when job responsibilities  change, and for promptly terminating  access  rights  when  the  employment  relationship ends.
should     COMBATING THE INSIDER THREAT: REDUCING SECURITY RISKS FROM MALICIOUS AND NEGLIGENT EMPLOYEES   the   to  originate  with   log-in  should  be   2.
Finally,  each  employee  should  be  required  to  acknowledge  that  only  he  or she is the authorized person to access  and view the organization’s information  through his or her log-in credentials and  is personally responsible for all activity  using those log-in credentials.
Screen security: Employees can reveal  sensitive  data  to  “shoulder  surfers”  in  airplanes,  at  coffee  shops,  and  even at work by failing to adequately  protect  their  computer  monitor  or  screen.
Mobile  device  security:  One  of  the  most  common  causes  of  security  breaches  is  the  exposure  of  sensitive  data  through  the  loss  or  theft  of  employees’  mobile  devices.
To  reduce  this  risk,  organizations  should  push  security controls to all mobile devices— whether employer-issued or personally  owned—that are used for work.
These  controls  should  include  encryption,   should  be   password  protection,  automatic  log- out  after  a  short  period  of  inactivity,  automatic log-out after a small number  of  unsuccessful  log-in  attempts,  and  remote  wipe  capability.
In  addition,  employees  routinely  reminded  of  the  need  to  physically  safeguard  their  mobile  device,  for  example,  by  not  sharing  the  device  with others and by securing the device  (for example, in a hotel safe) when the  device is left unattended.
In addition,  employees  should  be  instructed  to  immediately  report  the  loss  or  theft  of  the  device  to  a  person  or  group  designated to respond to such reports.
Remote work security: Corporate spies  can tap into unsecured WiFi connections  to  steal  sensitive  data.
To  reduce  this  risk,  employees  should  be  required  to  use  a  secure/encrypted  connection,  such  as  a  virtual  private  network  (VPN), to access the corporate network  when  working  remotely.
In  addition,  employees should generally be required  to use that secure remote connection to  conduct  business  involving  sensitive  data  rather  than  storing  the  sensitive  data  on  a  portable  storage  medium,  such  as  a  thumb  drive  or  a  laptop’s  hard  drive.
Where  local  storage  is  a  business  imperative  (e.g.,  when  work  must  get  done  during  a  long  fl ight),  employees should be required to use an  encrypted portable storage medium to  store sensitive data.
No  storage   the   in  personal  online  accounts:  Once  an  organization’s  sensitive  data  move  to  an  employee’s  personal  email  or  cloud  storage  account,  the  organization  effectively  loses  control  of  information.
Absent  the  employee’s  prior  written  authorization,  the  email  or  cloud  service  provider  generally  cannot  lawfully  disclose  the  organization’s  data  to  the  organization.
At  the  same  time,  employees  often  will  hesitate  to  sign  such  an  authorization  out  of  concern  that  the  employer  will  gain     165  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  access  to  private  information  stored  in the account, and employees almost  always  will  fl atly  refuse  to  sign  if  they are disgruntled or after they have  left  the  organization.
Consequently,  employers  should  unambiguously  communicate  to  their  workforce  that  storage  of  the  organization’s  sensitive  data  in  a  personal  online  account  is  prohibited.
Clean  desk  policy/secure  storage:  Whether employees are working at the  employer’s offi ce or their home offi ce,  paper  documents  containing  sensitive  data  can  easily  be  viewed  or  stolen  by  those  not  authorized  to  access  the  information,  such  as  maintenance  personnel at the offi ce or those making  repairs  at  the  home.
Employees  should  be  reminded  to  secure  paper  documents  containing  sensitive  data  in  locked  offi ces,  desk  drawers,  fi ling  cabinets,  or  storage  areas  and  to  remove  papers  containing  sensitive  data from their physical desktop when  it is unattended.
Organizations can avoid incidents like  this  by  prohibiting  employees  from  taking paper documents with sensitive  data  off-site  unless  there  is  a  strong  and legitimate business need to do so.
Typically,  employees  will  be  able  to  access the same information through a   ¦  166   secure remote connection.
When there  is a business need, employees should be  required to keep the paper documents  with them at all times or to secure the  documents  when  unattended,  just  as  employees  should  do  with  a  mobile  device.
Require  secure  disposal  of  paper  documents:  Pharmacies  and  other  health  care  providers  around  the  country  have  been  the  subject  of  scathing  publicity  and  government  investigations  journalists- cum-dumpster-divers  discovered  unshredded patient records discarded  in  bulk  behind  the  facility.
Whether  working  from  the  offi ce  or  from  home,  employees  should  be  required  to shred paper documents containing  sensitive  data  or  to  discard  them  in  secure disposal bins.
Private  conversations  are  meant  for  private  places:  In  today’s  world  of  mobile  telephony,  employees  often  can  end  up  discussing  sensitive  information  while  walking  down  the  street, riding in public transportation,  or sitting in a crowded restaurant.
Even  when  working  at  the  corporate  offi ce  or  the  home  offi ce,  employees  must  be aware that they are not discussing  sensitive  data  over  the  phone  where  unauthorized  can  overhear them.
individuals   ¦   Employee monitoring Monitoring  technology  has  become  increas- ingly sophisticated and can now help employ- ers  root  out  the  insider  threat.
For  example,  recently developed email and Internet moni- toring software uses “Big Data” techniques to  identify patterns of conduct for the workforce  as a whole, for particular groups, or for par- ticular  individuals  to  establish  a  norm  for  expected online conduct.
When an employee  deviates  from  the  norm—for  example,  by  downloading  an  unusually  large  number  of  fi les to an external storage device or by send- ing  an  unusual  number  of  emails  to  a  per- sonal e-mail account—the software alerts the     COMBATING THE INSIDER THREAT: REDUCING SECURITY RISKS FROM MALICIOUS AND NEGLIGENT EMPLOYEES   investigate   employer of the deviation from the norm, so  the  employer  can  further.
Employers concerned about the insider threat  should consider investing in monitoring soft- ware  that  can  perform  this  type  of  “user- based analytics.”  Employers also should consider installing  data loss prevention (DLP) software on their  networks.
For exam- ple,  DLP  software  may  identify  strings  of  digits resembling Social Security numbers in  an  outbound  email,  quarantine  the  email  before  it  leaves  the  organization’s  network,  and alert the employer’s IT department of a  potential data theft.
Although network surveillance software  can substantially enhance other information  security measures, implementation can pose  risks  for  the  organization.
Consequently,  employers should conduct a thorough legal  review  before  implementing  new  monitor- ing technology.
¦   Confi dentiality agreements, employee   training, and exit interviews  Although many of the safeguards described  above  may  appear  to  be  common  sense,  they likely will appear to be inconveniences  to many employees, especially to the Gen-Y  members  and  Millennials  in  the  workforce  for whom the broad disclosure of sensitive  information  through  social  media  has  become  natural.
Cisco’s  2012  Annual  Security  Report  bears  this  out,  reporting  that 71% of Gen-Y respondents “do not obey  policies”  set  by  corporate  IT.
Mobile  Device  Security  Report  found  that  25%  of   Millennials admitted to compromising their  organization’s  IT  security  as  compared  to  5% of Baby Boomers.
First,  employers  should  consider  requir- ing that all new hires whose responsibilities  will involve access to sensitive data execute  a  confi dentiality  agreement.
In  addition  to  identifying  those  categories  of  information  that  employees  must  keep  confi dential,  the  agreement  should  summarize  some  of  the  key steps employees are required to take to  preserve confi dentiality, require return of the  employer’s sensitive data upon termination  of the employment relationship, and confer  on  the  employer  enforcement  rights  in  the  event the employee breaches the agreement.
Employers  should  note  that  several  federal  regulators,  the  Securities  &  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the  National  Labor  Relations  Board  (NLRB),  and  the  EEOC,  have  been  fi nding  unlawful  overly  broad confi dentiality agreements that effec- tively restrict employees’ rights to engage in  legally  protected  conduct,  such  as  whistle- blowing or discussing the terms and condi- tions  of  employment  with  co-workers.
including   Second, educating employees on informa- tion  security  is  critical.
Training  should  address  a  range  of  topics,  including  (a)  the  employer’s  legal  obligations  to  safeguard  sensitive  data,  (b)  the  types  of  information  falling  within  the  scope  of  this  legal  duty,  (c) the consequences for the employer’s bot- tom line of failing to fulfi ll those legal obliga- tions,  (d)  the  steps  employees  can  take  to  help the employer fulfi ll its legal obligations,  and  critically  (e)  the  situations  that  consti- tute  a  security  incident  and  to  whom  the  incident should be reported.
Training should  be  recurring  and  supplemented  with  peri- odic  security  awareness  reminders.
These  reminders  could  take  the  form  of  email,  posts  on  an  internal  blog,  or  text  messages     167  ¦  CYBERSECURITY LEGAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  and can include critical alerts, such as notifi - cation  of  a  recent  phishing  email  sent  to  members  of  the  employer’s  workforce  or  warnings against clicking on links or open- ing  attachments  that  could  result  in  the  downloading of malicious code.
Third,  employers  should  consider  modi- fying their exit interview process to specifi - cally  address  information  security.
obtain  the  return  of  all  employer-owned  computers,  mobile  devices,  and  portable  storage  media  on  which  sensitive  data  may be stored;   ?
arrange  for  the  remote  wiping,  or  other  removal, of the employer’s sensitive data  from  any  of  the  employee’s  personal  mobile devices allowed to access corporate  information systems;   ?
¦   HR and in-house employment counsel need  a seat at the “information security table”  In many, if not most, organizations, there is a  chasm between the Human Resources depart- ment and in-house employment counsel, on   the one hand, and the groups responsible for  information security—the IT Department, the  Chief  Information  Security  Offi cer,  and/or  the Chief Privacy Offi cer—on the other.
The  former  group  views  information  security  as  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  latter,  and  the  latter group views employees (and employee  data) as the sole responsibility of the former.
However,  HR  professionals  and  in- house employment counsel can play a criti- cal  role  in  enhancing  an  organization’s  information  security.
They  typically  are  responsible for evaluating whether to reject  applicants  based  on  information  reported  by the employer’s pre-employment screen- ing vendor.
They routinely train new hires  and current employees on a wide range of  topics and could easily partner with infor- mation  security  professionals  to  conduct  information  security  training.
They  regularly  receive  and  investigate  complaints  of  sus- pected  employee  misconduct,  which  may  include reports generated by DLP software  or  other  online  surveillance  software  or  about  employees’  otherwise  mishandling  sensitive  data.
In sum, by making human resources pro- fessionals and in-house employment counsel  valued members of the organization’s infor- mation security team, organizations can sig- nifi cantly  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  their  overall information security program.
¦  168   SecurityRoundtable.org  Comprehensive approach  to cybersecurity  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  Developing a cybersecurity  strategy: Thrive in an evolving  threat environment Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive Vice  President; Sedar LaBarre, Vice President; Matt Doan,  Senior Associate; and Denis Cosgrove, Senior Associate  The Internet and ‘always on’ connectivity is transforming  how  we  live,  work,  and  do  business.
Game-changing  technology, powered by our increasingly connected soci- ety, offers more effi cient workers, new revenue streams,  and  stronger  customer  relationships.
Technology  is  not  optional; it is a core business enabler.
Cybersecurity was once widely considered just another  item  in  a  long  list  of  back-offi ce  functions.
Device confi guration?
A series of high-profi le cybersecurity attacks— from  Stuxnet  to  Target—demonstrate  that  cybersecurity  represents a business risk of the highest order.
However,  as  cybersecurity  makes  its  way  onto  the  executive  agenda,  it  is  simultaneously  time  to  rethink  our  strategies.
The  ‘Internet  of  Things’  is  more  than  a  fad.
It also requires new cybersecurity  strategies  that  take  a  broader  view  of  risk.
Developing  strategies  that  recognize  risk  beyond  back-end  IT  sys- tems is critical, to include products, customer interfaces,  and third-party vendors.
Above all, the new challenges  in  cybersecurity  demand  an  organizational-wide  approach  to  protecting,  and  ultimately  enabling,  the  business.
171  ¦  COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY  ¦   The value of getting cybersecurity right An  effective  cybersecurity  strategy  must  start  with  placing  it  in  the  context  of  the  business—what  your  company  uniquely  provides as products or services really deter- mines  how  to  approach  the  challenge.
For  old-school IT security hands, this is a differ- ent way of thinking.
The right cybersecurity strategy is guided  by two related considerations: (1) ‘How does  cybersecurity  enable  the  business?’  and  (2) ‘How does cyber risk affect the business?’  From  this  perspective,  cybersecurity  breaks  out  of  its  technical  box  and  IT  jargon.
It  focuses  on  competitive  advantage,  and  it  positions  cybersecurity  as  an  enabler  and  guarantor  of  the  core  business,  whatever  business you’re in.
¦   It takes an enterprise A  cybersecurity  strategy  grounded  in  your  unique  business  ecosystem  will  quickly  reveal what must be protected.
However, a cybersecurity strategy must now  go  further.
Your  industry  should  shape  the  fi ne-tuning of the scope here, but we can boil  the  components  of  your  ecosystem  ‘map’  down into several key features:   1.
Enterprise  IT:  the  back-end  technology  infrastructure  that  facilitates  company- wide  communications;  processes,  stores  corporate, and transfers data; and enables  workforce mobility   2.
Supply  chain:  the  fl ow  of  materials  and  and  components  inbound  channels  software)  through  to  they  are  then  operationalized  or  used  in  the  development of products and services  the  enterprise,  where   (hardware   ¦  172    3.
Product/service development: the research,  design,  testing,  and  manufacturing  environments  for  your  products  and  services   4.
External  infl uencers:  all  external  entities  that affect how you guide your business  to  include  regulators,  law  enforcement,  media, competitors, and customers.
A cybersecurity strategy at this scale requires  enterprise-wide  collaboration.
It  will  take  the  whole  organization  to  manage  cyber  risk,  so  it  is  imperative  to  cast  a  wide  net  and  include  representatives  from  across  business  units  in  strategy  formulation  dis- cussions.
It  requires  a  multidisciplinary  team  effort  to  develop  a  security  strategy  that refl ects the scale and complexity of the  business challenge.
¦   Elements of cyber strategy at scale Building  a  cybersecurity  strategy  can  seem  overwhelming,  but  it  doesn’t  have  to  be.
Start  with  a  vision,  understand  the  risk,  identify  controls,  and  build  organizational  capacity.
It’s  critical  to  paint  a  high-level  landscape  of  the  future  that  portrays  how  cybersecurity  is  intertwined  with  the  most  critical  parts  of  your  business.
Craft  a  short  story  on  how cyber protects and enables that.
That  will  give     DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY: THRIVE IN AN EVOLVING THREAT ENVIRONMENT   you a basis for right-sizing your security  program around these assets.
Build  the  right  team:  Once  you  defi ne  what  matters  and  how  much  security  makes sense, think about the people.
These days, you can’t  get by with your security program being  fi lled with technologist majority.
Time to  weave  in  an  accompanying  set  of  skill  sets  that  will  help  you  propel  you  to  success, to include organizational change  management,  crisis  management,  third- party  risk  management,  and  strategic  communications.
Enhance  your  controls:  This  is  largely  about  scope.
For example, if you deliver a ‘connected’  product  to  consumers,  you’ll  have  to  ensure strong embedded device security,  as well as protections over the airwaves.
Fortunately  there’s  a  great  deal  of  momentum  in  the  world  today,  with  new  methodologies,  technologies,  and  skill sets continuously being developed to  meet the challenge of today’s expanding  cyberattack surface.
Plan  for  contingencies:  No  one  can  ever  be  100%  secure,  so  it’s  vital  to  have  a  strong  incident  response  capability  in  place to manage the ensuing events when  something  happens,  because  something    5.
Monitor   the   threat:  Unfortunately,  cybersecurity  isn’t  only  about  reducing  risk  behind  your  fi rewalls.
It  must  also  include  maintaining  awareness  of  the  threat  landscape—external  and  internal.
Whether  that’s  employing  strong  monitoring  and  detection  capabilities,  consuming  threat  intelligence  feeds,  or  participating  in  an  industry-level  information  sharing  forum,  there  many  avenues  that  you  should strongly consider using.
Incident response is more than just having  the  right  technology  capabilities  in  place,  such as forensics and malware analysis.
In  fact, real success in cyber incident response  usually comes down to the people aspect.
They  are  all  critical to success; and with this expanded  scope of players, you can imagine how a  cyber matter can quickly rise to become a  top-line business matter.
the   culture:  The  best  organizations  out  there  today  do  this  well.
Because people are the core of your  business, it comes down to them ‘buying  in’ to cybersecurity as something that they  care  about.
From  your  dedicated  cyber  workforce,  to  business  unit  leaders,  to  those that manage your company’s supply  chain, you’ll need all hands on deck, each  doing  their  part  in  advocating  for  and  implementing  cybersecurity  measures.
A  security organization can make this easier  by  fi nding  ways  to  make  cyber  relevant  for  each  part  of  the  business  by  sharing  innovations  that  excite  and  enable  the  business.
¦   Bringing the strategy to life Perhaps  the  best  measure  of  an  effective  cybersecurity  strategy  is  its  ability  to  be  implemented  and  make  a  visible  change  in  how the business is operated.
With a strate- gy in hand, the next move is to build momen- tum  with  ‘quick  wins’  while  investing  in  long-term capability development.
The fi rst step is to use your strategy’s risk  framework to assess where you must apply  new or enhanced controls.
The  biggest cybersecurity challenges may not be  where your organization usually expects to  see them.
There are multiple ways to assess  how  well  the  organization  is  performing,  including workshops, external assessments,  tabletop exercises, or war games.
To appropriately assess the organization,  you  need  to  know  what  ‘good’  looks  like.
173  ¦  COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY  This  is  different  for  each  organization  and  industry,  but  relying  on  industry  bench- marks  and  existing  standards/frameworks  (e.g.,  NIST  Cyber  Framework)  is  a  good  place to get a quick read on your maturity.
However,  don’t  adopt  these  standards  blindly;  fi gure  out  what’s  applicable  to  your  needs  and  what’s  relevant  for  your  organization.
Right  away,  you’ll  want  to  ensure  that  you  are doing the basic blocking and tackling of  cybersecurity.
Many call this instilling prop- er ‘cyber hygiene,’ or putting a foundational  layer of protections and capabilities in place.
Perhaps  the  best  way—and  the  biggest  challenge—to  bringing  your  strategy  to  life  is to remember it isn’t policy or technology  that matters most, but people.
Once you’ve  embraced this idea and put the person at the  center of all of your decisions, you can really  start to envision what it’ll take for cybersecu- rity ‘change’ to happen in your organization.
¦   What getting it right looks like It  is  easier  to  write  about  the  concepts  of  a  good cyber strategy than it is to deliver one  for  your  organization.
However,  getting  cybersecurity  right  for  the  organization  has  benefi ts far beyond IT.
A strong cyber strategy  drives  security  capability  development  and  ultimately  has  the  power  to  transform  the  business into a more successful one.
An effec- tive cyber strategy looks different depending  on the industry and individual business, but  they all share some key features.
First, a strong cyber  strategy won’t be locked away in a fi le cabinet,  buried  in  a  hard  drive,  or  lost  in  the  cloud.
Instead, it will be part of your organization’s   ¦  174   core message, and it will feel alive.
That tone  will be set from the top, with senior executives  explaining how cyber will drive the future suc- cess of the business.
Whether  you’re  designing  a  new  product  or  launching  into  a  fresh  multinational  joint  venture,  cyber  is  a  conversation  that  will  always  take  place.
Requirements  are  built  in  from the beginning and brought to life as the  venture evolves.
Remember, it’s always easier  and cheaper to implement cyber earlier rather  than later in the lifecycle.
Cyber  is  communicated  in  simple  busi- ness language.
Don’t be paralyzed by those  who only want to ‘speak geek.’ Simple, easy- to-understand logic should prevail when com- municating  how  cybersecurity  is  enabling  your business.
With all  that you’ve invested in cybersecurity, the real  payoff comes when you see the component ele- ments work in harmony as a system.
A unifi ed  construct that links constituent technologies,  processes,  and  people  together  will  prove  highly effective in monitoring and responding  to  events  and  engaging  the  broader  business  ecosystem to get things done.
Cybersecurity  is  not  something  you  should  attempt  alone  as  an  organization.
Cybersecurity     DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY: THRIVE IN AN EVOLVING THREAT ENVIRONMENT   requires the power of community, new ideas,  and security capabilities coming to life.
When  successful, your organization is an active part  of  key  dialogues  with  industry  and  govern- ment.
Threat  intelligence  and  best  practices  are  shared  two  ways,  but  more  importantly,  you integrate into the fabric of a very impor- tant and very valuable community.
These  advocates  help  spread  the  cybersecurity  vision  broadly  and  provide ‘on the ground’ feedback to make your  security strategy stronger.
Security  is  now  embedded  across  your  ecosystem.
Success  at  this  point  means that you’ve carefully and deliberately  initiated dialogue and worked with different  elements of the business to embed security in  places beyond Enterprise IT and extended it  into broader touchpoints across the external  world.
From  senior  leadership  to  customer-facing  sales  teams,  cybersecurity  is  integrated  as  part  of  your  cultural DNA.
Your  organization  has  evolved to the point where your organization  is now living the principles of good cybersecu- rity without even thinking about it.
SecurityRoundtable.org     175  ¦  Designing a Cyber Fusion  Center: A unifi ed approach  with diverse capabilities Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive Vice  President; Jason Escaravage, Vice President; Ernie  Anderson, Principal; and Christian Paredes, Associate  Since the early 2000s, organizations have focused cyberse- curity  efforts  around  a  preventative,  “defense-in-depth”  approach.
The multiple layers of security are intended to  thwart  attackers;  this  trend  has  become  known  as  the  “moat-and-castle”  defense:  higher  walls,  a  deeper  moat,  and  other  fortifi cations  to  deter  or  prevent  the  enemy  from breaching the castle grounds.
Within  the  past  several  years,  high-profi le  breaches  across  the  fi nancial,  government,  retail,  health-care,  defense, and technology sectors have spotlighted the need  for  a  better  incident  response  (IR)  capability  to  detect,  contain,  and  remediate  threats.
However, many organizations lack a mature IR  capability and end up spending millions of dollars to out- source  IR  services.
Furthermore,  once  the  incident  is  remediated, organizations are still left wondering how to  effectively  secure  themselves  for  the  highest  return  on  investment (ROI).
Prevention remains a critical component of an effective  security  program.
And  organizations  are  increasingly  investing in native detection and response capabilities, or  a Security Operations Center (SOC).
But the people, pro- cesses,  and  technologies  that  are  the  backbone  of  SOC  must be integrated within one Cyber Fusion Center (CFC)  that  also  combines  functions  such  as  Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  (CTI),  Red  Teaming,  and  Attack  Surface  Reduction (ASR).
The Cyber Fusion Center.
The CFC is a comprehensive,  integrated approach to security.
177  ¦  COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY  The  CFC  approach  does  not  guarantee  that there will be no security incidents; this is  an impossible feat.
Rather, it ensures that all  security efforts are coordinated effi ciently by  leveraging  the  benefi ts  of  proximity  (either  physical or logical) and easy communication  between security teams.
The  CFC  is  designed  to  integrate  key  security functions into a single unit without  stovepipes or prohibitive bureaucracy:   ?
Security  Operations  Center  (SOC):  the  heart  of  the  CFC  and  the  fi rst  line  of  an organization’s defense responsible for  detecting, responding to, containing, and  remediating threats, as well as proactively  identifying malicious activity.
The SOC is  also  home  to  Threat  Defense  Operations  (TDO),  the  dedicated  “hunting”  arm  of  security  and  intelligence  operations  responsible  for  actioning  intelligence,  conducting  in-depth  malware  analysis,  and  continually  building  and  improving  prevention and detection methods.
Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  (CTI):  the  “forward  observers”  responsible  for  identifying  threats  to  the  organization  and  disseminating  timely,  relevant,  and  actionable reporting to the SOC, C-Suite,  and other stakeholders.
Red  Team:  the  “attackers”  who  simulate  the  tactics,  techniques,  and  procedures  (TTP)  of  to  your  organization.
Attack  Surface  Reduction  (ASR):  the  proactive  defense  group  responsible  for  and  mitigating  vulnerabilities,  unnecessary  assets,  and  nonessential  services.
More  than  just  patch  management,  optimized  ASR  teams focus on continually improving an  organization’s hardening and deployment  procedures  to  eliminate  vulnerabilities  before systems go live.
By integrating these functions, the CFC aims  to  break  down  communication  barriers,   ¦  178   centralize  threat  knowledge  and  analysis,  unify  the  organization’s  security  strategy,  and ultimately maximize the value of invest- ments in cybersecurity.
Although  the  security  functions  that  make  up  the  CFC  are  not  new,  the  CFC  approach  represents  a  complex  interaction  between  the  security  teams  with  multiple  “touch points,” parallel workfl ows, and con- stant  feedback  mechanisms.
With  the  right  design  and  implementation  considerations  organizations can:   ?
increase  operational  effectiveness  by  orchestrating  the  security  functions  and  information fl ow from threat intelligence,  through security and IT operations   ?
improve  security  readiness  by  enabling  stronger  detection  mechanisms  and  awareness of threats  security  maturation  by   ?
accelerate  the  costs  associated  with  reducing  coordinating  complex  security  functions  across multiple teams.
More  than  just a security approach, the CFC is a secu- rity  mind-set  that  organizations  can  imple- ment  to  better  secure  themselves,  protect  their customers, and reduce costly business  disruptions.
¦  Building a robust SOC to detect and respond   to threats  threats   Organizations  are  quickly  recognizing  the  need  to  detect  and  respond  to  a  variety  of  threats;  simply  blocking  isn’t  enough.
The  Security  Operations  Center  (SOC)  is  the  organization’s  fi rst  line  of  defense  against  all  forms  of  threats  and  is  the heart of the CFC.
The SOC will handle  any  suspected  malicious  activity  and  work  closely with the other teams in the CFC.
A  well-designed  and  maintained  SOC  will  focus on gaining effi ciencies though contin- uous  analyst  training  and  mentoring,  and  constant  evaluation  of  the  organization’s  security technologies.
DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES   A  tiered  SOC  structure.
TDO  engineers  deploy  the  detection  logic  to  a  range  of  devices,  appliances, tools, and sensors that make up  an  organization’s  security  stack.
The  rules,  signatures, and queries create a threat-based  preventative  sensor  network  that  generates  network and host-based alerts that Tier 1–3  analysts in the SOC respond to.
Managing  all  the  security  alerts  (aka  “alert  fatigue”).
This  process—building  detection  solutions  and  then  identifying  and  mitigat- ing  threats—is  where  many  organizations  struggle.
Oftentimes, implementation of effi - cient and effective SOC processes are stifl ed  by  an  overwhelming  number  of  consoles,  alerts,  threat  feeds,  and  tools  that  prohibit  seamless  workfl ows  for  analysts.
While  security managers should continually iden- tify  potential  feeds  and  technologies  to  invest  in,  their  impact  on  the  SOC  analyst  should always be a primary consideration:   ?
How many new alerts will this technology   or new data feed produce?
Who will tune the technology to limit the   number of false positives it produces?
Is the technology fi lling a gap in detection  capabilities  or  adding  on  to  existing  capabilities?
How  does  the  introduction  of  this  new   technology affect the SOC workfl ow?
The  main  point  to  remember  is  that  more  technology,  tools,  and  threat  feeds  do  not  necessarily enable your SOC to operate more  effi ciently.
Designs  that  emphasize  smooth   Capabilities  Enable Detection  Identify Threats  Mitigate Threats  SOC 24/7 Organizational Framework  Description  “Operationlize” threat intelligence to enable automated detection and manual analysis within and across prevention and detection technology  First-level responder responsible for detecting and assessing cybersecurity threats and incidents across the environment  Conducts in-depth analyses of security incidents with speci?c ability to  identify Indicators of Compromise, perform root-cause analysis, and execute containment strategies  Manage  • Shift Leader Oversight • Case Mgt.
Tracking Tool • 24/7 Structure  Case Management Approach  Standardize  • Formal Shift Change Process • Process and Procedures    Documentation • Business Process Reengineering  Measure  • Case Mgt.
Dashboard • Monitor, Detect, and    Contain Metrics • Real-Time Improvements    179  ¦  COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY  workfl ows  and  “painless”  methods  of  data  collection (e.g., analysts do not need to con- tact  other  teams  to  access  certain  data)  are  more likely to succeed than those that prior- itize technology.
Organizations should focus  on  technology  that  enables  SOC  investiga- tors  to  spend  less  time  collecting  data  and  more time investigating the root cause of the  activity they’ve been alerted to.
Implementing 24/7 operations and managing  investigations.
Design  and  implementation  should  focus  on  standardizing  daily  opera- tions,  case  management,  and  methods  of  “measuring  success.”  Modern-day  threats  necessitate that SOCs operate 24/7, 365 days  a  year,  requiring  well-thought-out  shift  schedules  and  defi ned  roles.
Leaders  with  managerial and technical experience can aid  in workfl ow management and provide ana- lyst training.
This  tool ideally provides metrics on how effec- tively  your  SOC  monitors,  detects,  and  contains  cases  and  will  allow  an  organiza- tion  to  identify  gaps  in  people,  processes,  and technologies.
Standardizing your standard operating pro- cedures.
Successful  implementation  also  demands  accurate  and  up-to-date  docu- mentation.
This includes documentation on  network  architecture,  standardized  operat- ing procedures (SOPs), and point-of-contact  lists.
Many organizations fail to update,  train,  and  test  their  staff  and  leaders  on  SOPs, hurting their response times and con- tainment metrics.
The  SOC  provides  core  security  functions  within  the  CFC  and  can  achieve effi ciencies through close integration  with  other  teams  such  as  CTI  and  TDO.
¦  180   Instead  of  looking  to  new  technology  fi rst,  successful  organizations  will  constantly  evaluate their security posture and frequent- ly train their analysts on how to react to new  threats.
Organizations  must  carefully  con- sider  how  new  technology  and  tools  will  impact the analysts’ workfl ow and their abil- ity  to  detect  and  respond  to  threats  while  focusing on processes and procedures.
¦  Using Cyber Threat Intelligence to anticipate   threats  Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) has become  the security buzzword of 2015.
As this term has saturated the mar- ket  and  security  circles,  the  true  meaning  and value of threat intelligence has become  clouded.
First,  and  most  important,  only  humans  can  produce  threat intelligence through focused research,  a  synthesis  of  multiple  sources  (aka  “all- source analysis”), and clear, concise commu- nication that explains the relevance of threats  to your organization.
Additionally, good threat intel- ligence  will  be  implemented  in  a  way  that  demonstrates the following characteristics:  Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  is  timely.
Cyber  intelligence  addresses  an  impending  threat  to the business environment.
Receiving that  intelligence  before  the  threat  is  realized  is  crucial to the organization.
Dissemination of  strategic  and  tactical  intelligence,  including  indicators  of  compromise  (IOCs),  can  take  the form of indications and warning (warn- ing of an imminent threat), daily or weekly     DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES   reports (highlights on relevant threats), and  executive  briefs  (assessments  on  major  and  specifi c  cyber  issues  for  C-suite  stakehold- ers).
Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  is  relevant.
For  many organizations thresholds for relevan- cy  are  tricky  to  defi ne,  especially  when  media  reports  constantly  warn  about  a  range of threats.
A cyber breach in a distant  industry—even a major one—may not con- cern  you  as  much  as  a  breach  within  your  own sector; a vulnerability in a technology  platform  you  don’t  use  is  obviously  less  important than a potential zero-day vulner- ability  in  your  enterprise-enabling  plat- form.
Relevant threat intelligence produces  valuable insights on not only issues occur- ring in the global business environment but  also on specifi c issues within your industry  and  related  to  your  IT  environment.
Even  further, it strives to give you unique insight  into  specifi c  adversaries  targeting  your  organization  or  peers,  by  assessing  their  intentions and capabilities.
Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  is  actionable.
Actionable  threat  intelligence  is  created  when  analysts  fi lter  through  large  volumes  of data and information (from human sourc- es,  technical  feeds,  criminal  forums,  etc.
),  analyze  why  specifi c  pieces  of  information  are relevant to your organization, and com- municate how that information can be used  by  various  stakeholders.
C-suite  executives  need  strategic  “big  picture”  intelligence  to  inform business decisions such as risks asso- ciated  with  an  increasingly  global  IT  foot- print.
Technical  intelligence  will  also  be  used  to  determine  if  certain  mali- cious actions or indicators have already been  present on your network.
Oftentimes,  business  decisions  have  to  be  made without all the information.
For  example, attacks on organizations in related  industries  can  serve  as  an  indication  that  your business might soon be targeted (or has  already been targeted).
Your  security  team  will  handle  a  wide  array of potential threats and must be able to  quickly  triage  events,  determine  the  threat  level,  and  mitigate  incidents.
CTI  can  help  SOC analysts to prioritize these alerts, can aid  in investigations, and can help SOC analysts  attribute malicious activity to specifi c threats  or  threat  groups.
Over  time,  by  leveraging  technical intelligence the SOC will develop a  stronger  understanding  of  the  threats  they  face, enabling them to act more quickly.
The  TDO  component  of  SOC  will  also  closely  coordinate with CTI to conduct analysis and  develop creative detection mechanisms.
Real,  human-developed  Cyber  Threat  Intelligence  will  enable  your  organization  to  pre-empt  threats,  assess  risk, and take appropriate defensive actions.
Benefi ts such as avoiding the cost of poste- vent  recovery  and  remediation,  and  pre- venting  the  theft,  destruction,  and  public  release  of  critical  data,  make  Cyber  Threat  Intelligence critical to your organization.
¦  Conducting Red Team exercises to “stress-  test” and strengthen your Cyber Fusion  Center  A fundamental question for every business  is:  Will  your  cybersecurity  organization  be  ready when an attack comes?
Red Team oper- ations  will  ideally  be  designed  to  simulate  the  tactics,  techniques,  and  procedures  of  threats that your CTI team has assessed to be     181  ¦  COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY  a risk to your organization.
Your SOC could  also  be  a  valuable  source  of  input  as  you  determine how to implement your Red Team  operations.
This  implementation  allows  those  who  are  aware  to  observe  the  event  as it unfolds, particularly how teams inter- act  with  each  other,  how  information  is  passed  along,  how  stakeholders  are  engaged, and how the teams handle a vari- ety  of  attack  scenarios.
The  end  result  of  a  Red  Team  activity  should  be  valuable  insight  your  security  team  can  use  to  improve its capabilities.
Are  there  changes  that  could  be  made in how security tools are confi gured to  improve  future  detection  of  this  type  of  attack?
These  sample  questions  frame  the  improvements  that  can  be  implemented  within the cybersecurity organization.
Although the SOC and  Red Team functions contrast, their missions  are the same: to protect the organization and  improve its security capabilities.
Implementation  of  Red  Team  operations  should  therefore  emphasize  the  interde- pendency  between  the  SOC  and  Red  Team  mission.
Fundamentally, Red Team  design  and  implementation  takes  a  human- centric approach.
SOC  analysts  learn  to  develop  an  appreciation for the fact that they are fi ghting  people  who  make  decisions  to  achieve  an  objective—it’s not just about the malware.
¦  Reducing your organization’s attack surface Efforts  to  protect  your  organization  will  be  signifi cantly  diminished  if  your  IT  systems  have easily exploitable vulnerabilities, unnec- essary  services,  and  nonessential  assets.
Thus,  the  goal  of  Attack  Surface  Reduction (ASR) is to close all but the required  doors  to  your  technical  infrastructure  and  limit access to those doors through monitor- ing,  vulnerability  assessment/mitigation,  and access control.
The ASR team is dedicated to identifying,  reducing, and managing critical vulnerabili- ties, services, and assets, while also focusing  on  preventing  the  introduction  of  vulnera- bilities via improved hardening procedures.
Understanding  and  prioritizing  your  “attack  surface.” Implementing ASR is all about iden- tifying and understanding your most critical  business  applications  and  services—the     DESIGNING A CYBER FUSION CENTER: A UNIFIED APPROACH WITH DIVERSE CAPABILITIES   “crown  jewels”—including  their  functions,  supporting infrastructure, scope, and inherent  vulnerabilities.
This process entails a series of  vulnerability  scans,  security  documentation  review, architecture assessments, host discov- ery scans, nonintrusive penetration tests, and  targeted interviews with IT personnel.
The assets that are most  likely to be the victim of a high-impact attack  or leveraged in a high-impact attack (such as  Adobe Flash) should receive the highest pri- ority,  most  robust  security  controls,  and  attention from the CFC.
is  not  a   More  than  just  patch  management.
While  vulnerability and patch management is a core  ASR  function,  achieving  a  vulnerability-free  organization  realistic  goal.
Continually  improving  deployment  and  hardening  procedures,  especially  for  publicly facing services and services that may  permit attackers to access high-trust zones, is  a critical ASR process for facilitating preven- tive measure and effective mitigation timing.
ASR closely collaborates with other  CFC  functions,  especially  CTI  and  TDO,  which  can  develop  rules  to  detect  exploita- tion of new vulnerabilities.
ASR  will  work with CTI to prioritize the most relevant  vulnerabilities  based  on  reports  of  their  exploitation “in the wild.”  A  highly  technical  function  that  demands  strong human analysis.
Organizations require continuous scans and  costly-to-maintain  confi guration  manage- ment databases (CMDB) to track and ensure  the  attack  surface  hasn’t  expanded  beyond  the organization’s acceptable risk level.
While there are many technologies avail- able  to  aid  organizations  in  managing  vul- nerabilities  and  assets,  human  analysts  can  leverage  contextual  understanding  of  vul- nerabilities  and  the  attack  surface  in  ways  that scanning software cannot provide.
Experienced  ASR  security  professionals— who possess a deep understanding of network  engineering,  IT  concepts,  and  security—are  able to synthesize disparate pieces of informa- tion that can point to a previously undetected  or contextually important attack vector.
Attack Surface Reduction  enables  organizations  to  proactively  reduce  security  vulnerability-related  risk  prior  to  implementation and to mitigate existing and  other  inevitable  risks.
Importantly,  the ASR  function is designed so that humans comple- ment the technology to minimize the attack  surface  to  an  optimized  level  that  balances  security  risks  and  day-to-day  realities  of  enterprise business operations.
¦  Cyber Fusion Center attention The  seemingly  endless  string  of  breaches  across  major  U.S.  sectors—fi nance,  technol- ogy,  manufacturing,  and  others—leaves  C-suite  executives  wondering,  “Will  we  be  next?”  or  even,  “Have  we  already  been  breached?”  New  tools,  technologies,  and  data  sources  may  help  in  preventing  an  attack, but threat actors are clearly capable of  scaling the castle walls, or forging the castle  moat.
Yet  by  developing  a  Cyber  Fusion  Center, organizations develop the speed, col- laboration, coordination, information fl ows,  and C-suite awareness necessary to not only  survive but thrive.
SecurityRoundtable.org     183  ¦  Design best practices  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  What are they after?
A threat-based approach to  cybersecurity risk management Intercontinental Exchange & New York  Stock Exchange – Jerry Perullo, CISO  Given fi nite resources and the ongoing threat of the “next  big hack,” cybersecurity is not the place to let a thousand  fl owers bloom.
Distilling the truly critical  areas  of  focus  requires  a  balanced  approach  that  is  well  served  by  beginning  with  the  end  in  mind  and  asking,  “What are they really after?”  Traditional  guidance  has  centered  security  program  construction and audit on comprehensive standards-based  frameworks.
Although the popularity of specifi c standards  has  waxed  and  waned,  general  principles  have  revolved  around identifying assets, establishing a risk management  program  around  those  assets,  and  establishing  preventa- tive,  detective,  and  corrective  controls  to  protect  those  assets.
Controls should be  mapped  to  an  established  framework  and  any  gaps  or  vulnerabilities  identifi ed.
The  challenge,  however,  is  that  this produces a massive corpus of focus areas and controls  that  cannot  be  digested  in  a  single  targeted  governance  session.
And fi nally, it does not produce a ready answer to  the top board concern: “How could we be hacked?”  Likewise, reacting to headlines and rushing to establish  the controls and technology cited in the latest news story  will  divert  all  resources  to  someone  else’s  vulnerability,  whereas  yours  may  be  very  different.
Simply  asking,  “Could what happened last week happen to us?” may at  best result in a false sense of confi dence or a mad dash to   187  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  address  a  gap  that  isn’t  relevant  to  your  organization.
Vendors cannot be faulted for  preying on this tendency, and the result is a  barrage  of  solutions  to  the  last  headline’s  problems:  “You  desperately  need  encryp- tion.”  “You  need  behavioral  technology  to  baseline  administrator  activity  and  to  alert  unusual  access  times  or  locations.“  “You  need to give up on securing everything and  only focus on the critical assets.” “You need  stronger  passwords.” All  of  these  solutions  have their place, but if they are not respon- sive to the threats facing your business, they  may cause more distraction than protection  based on your unique requirements.
Identifying  a  relevant  and  reasonable  agenda  for  a  governance  session  requires  a  targeted  and  balanced  approach.
Let  us  group the major cyber headlines of the last  decade into several large categories.
With a  fi nite  grouping  of  threats,  we  can  begin  to  model  what  each  threat  would  look  like  to  your organization, which leads to an assess- ment  of  likelihood  and  impact.
By  all  means,  all  of  the  threats  listed  below  should  receive  treatment  in  some capacity in any cybersecurity plan, but  prioritizing which are most relevant to your  organization  will  expose  the  most  valuable  areas  to  explore  with  limited  time.
Further,  identifying  business  practices  that  expose  you to a particular threat category may lead  you to reconsider them in light of new costs  that  were  not  included  in  previous  assess- ments.
¦  Threat category 1: Data theft Do you manage assets that can be easily mon- etized?
Credit  numbers  and  social  security  numbers—in  bulk—are  the  drivers  behind  many newsworthy breaches.
Criminals have  established the proper fencing operations and  can  justify  enormous  risk  and  effort  to  cap- ture  millions  of  card  numbers  or  pieces  of  personally identifi able information (PII) that   ¦  188   allow identity theft.
Is access to the systems housing this data  tightly controlled, audited, and alarmed,  including via asset-based controls?
Again,  this  does  not  mean  that  data  theft  is  acceptable  in  any  organization.
Close examination often shows  that  ring-fencing,  asset-focused  controls,  encryption, and other concentrations born of  the rash of recent card and PII breaches may  not  be  appropriate  for  more  common  and  less  frequently  targeted  data,  however.
If  the  data  you  are  protecting  are  much  more  valuable  to  you  than  to  an  assailant,  tradi- tional controls such as company-wide access  control,  permission  reviews,  and  identity  management are probably the right empha- sis and should not be neglected in pursuit of  stopping a phantom menace.
¦  Threat category 2: Activism Is  your  organization  the  target  of  frequent  protest or activism?
You may or may not  know if there are groups with an ideological     WHAT ARE THEY AFTER?
A THREAT-BASED APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT    motivation to put a black eye on your busi- ness.
Cyber opens up a whole new realm of  ways  for  people  to  accomplish  this,  and  often with anonymity.
Although  attacking  customer  access  or  more  internalized  sys- tems  may  be  more  damaging  in  reality,  remember that the goal is to make a splash  on a big stage with minimal effort or expo- sure.
High-profi le  attacks  in  this  category  include  the  near-incessant  Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks  against major banks, particularly those with  names evoking western countries.
Targets of  defacement  include  Twitter  and  Facebook  profi les  of  targeted  companies  and  govern- ment entities.
If this type of threat is likely to  be pointed at your organization, good ques- tions to ask include the following:   ?
Are credentials to offi cial company social  media  accounts  tightly  controlled  by  a  group  outside  marketing  that  is  more  security conscious?
If this type of threat is not applicable to your  organization,  focusing  controls  and  review  on  mitigating  such  attacks  may  not  be  the  best allocation of resources.
Although  these  threats  require more sophisticated tactics and more  time  to  perpetrate,  they  often  bring  highly  motivated  and  coordinated  threat  actors.
These attacks can  be the most diffi cult to defend against, but  their  reliance  on  persistent  access  and  a  longer  lifecycle  to  build  towards  the  fi nal  goal makes detective and corrective controls  more  valuable  and  decreases  reliance  on  absolute prevention.
Good  questions  to  ask  if  you  are  at  risk  of  this  category  of  attack  include  the  following  (and  employees  includes  contractors  and  vendors):   ?
Do  individual  employees  recognize  the  importance  of  their  role  in  securing  the  organization  and  what  an  attack  may  look like?
Are employees educated and incentivized   to act responsibly with regard to cyber?
189  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES   ?
Are systems detecting suspicious employee  behavior  that  may  indicate  credentials  under the control of an outsider?
Although fraud is  certainly not a new challenge, Internet con- nectivity  has  certainly  brought  it  to  new  levels.
If  this  is  relevant  to  your  organiza- tion, you have likely been dealing with the  ramifi cations  long  before  cyber  considera- tions were added.
Have  we  deployed  and  enforced  two- factor  authentication  such  as  text  messages, mobile phone apps, or physical  tokens  to  require  our  customers  to  have  more  than  a  username  or  password  to  authenticate?
Are  we  using  adaptive  authentication  to  identify  suspicious  locations,  access  times, or transaction patterns in addition  to classic credentials?
Are  we  working  closely  with  peer  institutions  and  competitors  to  share  threat  intelligence  and  identify  common  patterns we should detect and/or block?
At a minimum, automated  attacks look to procure access to your IT envi- ronment  so  that  your  computing  resources  can  be  made  available  for  more  nefarious  aims.
Attackers in this category do  not  care  (or  often  know)  if  your  computers  belong to a fi nancial services fi rm, manufac- turer, university, home network, or hospital.
Protecting  your  organization  from  these  common attacks requires being less exposed  than the next target.
Have  we   organization  that  cybersecurity?
Are  only  absolutely  required  services   exposed to the Internet?
Does our corporate email employ controls  to fi lter out the most common virus and  spam campaigns?
Does  our  corporate  Internet  access  incorporate  controls  to  block  access  to  malicious websites?
In  addition  to  the  preventative  controls  out- lined above, you should ask the following:  ¦  Threat category 5: Commoditized hacking  Although  specialized  threats  are  associated  with  specifi c  targets,  all  organizations  have  exposure to the most common family of com- moditized  threats.
These  threats  are  oppor- tunistic  and  warrant  different  controls  than    ?
Have  we,  via  policy  and  practice,  established  the  principle  that  PCs  and  laptops are disposable, that data on these   ¦  190     WHAT ARE THEY AFTER?
A THREAT-BASED APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT    devices  should  not  be  relied  upon,  and  that  network  storage  should  be  used  to  house any critical data?
¦  Conclusion Although  cybersecurity  is  a  relatively  new  fi eld, it has already grown into an expansive  area  requiring  monitoring  and  controls   around  mission  critical  infrastructure  and  data.
Investing time in analyzing threats and iden- tifying what assets adversaries are truly after  is a critical fi rst step in establishing an effec- tive governance policy around cybersecurity.
SecurityRoundtable.org     191  ¦  Breaking the status quo: Designing  for breach prevention Palo Alto Networks Inc.  ¦  Today’s reality and commoditization of threats The  statistics  regarding  the  success  of  advanced  cyberthreats  paint  a  very  grim  picture.
The  increasing  speed  at  which  new  security  threats  appear,  and  the  growing  sophistication  of  criminal  hackers’  techniques,  make fi ghting cybercrime a constant challenge.
A recent  study by Cyber Edge found that 71 percent of the secu- rity professionals polled said their networks had experi- enced  a  breach,  up  signifi cantly  from  the  previous  year  (62  percent).
And  half  of  those  respondents  felt  that  a  successful cyberattack against their network was likely in  the next 12 months, compared to just 39 percent in 2013.
These  attacks  come  from  multiple  angles,  through the edge of the network and directly at the users  of our digital infrastructure.
The cat-and-mouse game between attack- ers and defending organizations is no longer a competition.
Attackers  have  not  only  pulled  ahead,  they’ve  gained  so  much distance that most security teams have given up on  the notion that they can prevent an attack and are instead  pouring  investment  into  trying  to  quickly  detect  attacks,  and defi ning incident response plans rather than trying to  stop them.
Because legacy security offerings consist   193  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  of a set of highly disjointed technologies that  only allow detection of attacks once they are  already on the network or endpoint.
Organizations cannot hire their way out  of this problem by throwing more people at  navigating a legacy architecture or making  up for the inherent gaps between the siloed  technologies.
Instead, organizations should  be considering next-generation technology  that  natively  integrates  security  to  deliver  automated  results,  preventing  attackers  from  achieving  their  ultimate  objectives.
Given the sheer volume and complexity of  threats, it’s important to use automation to  accelerate  detection  and  prevention  with- out the reliance on a security middleman.
Despite  the  growing  cybersecurity  chal- lenge we are all facing, we cannot give up on  our  digital  infrastructure.
Customers  are  becoming  more  and  more  reliant  on  the  Internet  and  our  networks  to  do  business  and  access  commercial  services.
Legacy  security approaches that focus only on detec- tion  and  remediation,  or  rely  on  a  series  of  disjointed  tools,  abandon  this  trust  and  can  introduce  signifi cant  risk  by  failing  to  consider how to prevent cyberattacks in the  fi rst place.
As these techniques evolve,  the  risk  of  breach  increases,  and,  as  we  all  know, an organization is only as strong as its  weakest  entry  point.
Therefore,  an  effective  strategy  must  work  to  disrupt  an  attack  at  multiple points, including:   ?
developing a Zero Trust security posture  that  focuses  on  only  allowing  legitimate  users  and  applications,  as  opposed  to  trying  to  block  everyone  and  everything  that is bad  ¦  194    ?
preventing  installation  of  malware— including  unknown  and  polymorphic  malware   ?
closely  monitoring  and  controlling  data  traffi c  within  the  organization  to  protect  against  the  unabated  lateral  movement  when legitimate identities are hijacked.
Often it is a ‘window’ that is left  open or a ‘bag’ that is not screened that lets  an attacker slip into a network undetected.
After  they  are  inside  a  network,  attackers  will  sit  and  wait,  patiently  planning  their  next  move,  until  they  are  sure  they  can  reach  their  objective.
Traditional  approaches  to  security  focus  on  installing a feature to disrupt only one point  along  this  lifecycle.
This  approach  often  comes from the fact that different parts of an  IT  security  team  have  different  objectives:  network  administrators  care  about  connec- tivity and the fi rewall, info security analysts  care  about  analytics,  and  so  forth.
They  seldom  have  to  really  work  together  in  a  coordinated  manner  because  this  approach  was previously useful at stopping low-level  threats  that  involved  opportunistic  target- ing, such as the infamous email scam from a  foreign prince needing to transfer $1 million  to the U.S.
BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION    However,  today’s  attacks  have  become  more  and  more  sophisticated  as  advanced  tools have proliferated and as effective attack  strategies  have  been  developed  and  shared  among criminal and nation-state adversaries.
These attacks are often called advanced per- sistent threats (APTs), so named because they  use advanced tools and persistently target an  organization  again  and  again  until  they  get  in.
They  are  patient  and  stealthy,  preferring  to forego a quick boom and bust for a longer  payoff of high-value information.
While  APTs  used  to  be  the  domain  of  nation-state espionage, today organizations  large and small face these high-level threats  from  actors  seeking  to  steal  sensitive   intellectual  property  and  fi nancial  informa- tion, disrupt digital systems, or cause embar- rassment.
Let’s take a look  at the steps an attacker goes through to get  into and out of a network.
They research, identify, and select targets, oftentimes using phishing tactics or extracting  public information from an employee’s public online profi le or from corporate websites.
These criminals also scan for network vulnerabilities and services or applications they can  exploit.
Even job websites can be a gold mine of information.
If you are looking to hire a new  engineer who is familiar with a certain security product, an attacker can deduce what  you are using to protect your network and will know where common gaps are in your  security.
People and processes are just as important to security as  technology.
Good training and strong security practices will help limit reconnaissance  and harden your security profi le.
You should be aware of what your adversary can  learn from your corporate website and ensure that members of your organization with  high-level access receive training to be security conscious.
Finally, there are many services that offer advanced ‘red-team’ exercises to help you   identify weaknesses in your security posture.
The hacker must choose  his method for gaining access onto your network.
This access can be digital, or even physical,  but is primarily intended to gain a foothold from which to plan the assault and achieve the  attacker’s objectives.
With the information gained from their reconnaissance, the attackers have to determine  which methods they must use to penetrate your network.
Continued    195  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  Advice along the cyberattack lifecycle—cont'd  ?
An attacker will use information gathered during the reconnaissance phase  to craft an email with a malicious attachment for a specifi c user he believes has access  to sensitive credentials or information.
Many organizations have begun training their employees to spot these attacks by  sending test emails that can track who opens them.
Even with the best training, a well-crafted spear phishing  email that appears to come from a family member, friend, or boss can trick the  most seasoned security veteran.
It’s vital to ensure that you have technical security  measures as well to mitigate any malicious malware that might ride email into your  networks.
Another approach to gaining access is known as watering hole attacks.
When a user visits the website, a software  exploitation kit installs malware on the victim’s computer, which then reports  back to the attacker so he knows who he’s infected and can access their system to  steal data.
Watering hole attacks are harder to pull off because they require compromising a   separate web server, but they can be very effective if a company is watching for  malicious fi les in email.
Traditional security products do not always prevent their  users from visiting malicious websites.
Once attackers gain access ‘inside’ an organization, they can activate attack  code on the victim’s computer (also known as a ‘host’) and ultimately take full control.
To gain full control over a victim, specialized programs exploit vulnerabilities in   existing software to install themselves as legitimate users.
Advanced  security software will hunt for malware that uses zero-days by searching for and  stopping common techniques attackers use after they have gained access to your  network.
Your organization   should also have a process in place to regularly update and patch all your software  and hardware.
While you should always lean toward  patching and updating as soon as possible, the balance of security and operability  must be viewed through your own business risk management practices.
As a fi rst order of business, advanced attackers will seek to establish themselves  as securely and quietly as possible across your network.
They do this by taking advantage of the trust of the digital systems they are working  in.
He will play this game  of laterally escalating access privileges to gain a higher and higher level of control of  your systems.
Along the way the attacker will also open backdoors that allow him to  connect back into your network even if he is eventually caught and shut out.
This is  why it can be especially diffi cult to fully remove an advanced actor from a network.
It seems strange, but many of the tools attackers use can be found freely online or for sale   on the Internet.
Tools are viewed just like a hammer and nails, where on the one hand  security professionals use them to test systems and build stronger security, but on the  other hand they can be used as weapons.
These ‘off-the-shelf’ security tools, while highly  capable, can often be found by traditional security methods such as antivirus software.
However, more advanced actors will build their own custom tools, such as remote  access tools (RATs), that are undetectable by antivirus software.
These  tools require a larger investment from the attacker and will primarily be designed to  gain a foothold as a seemingly legitimate user on the network.
From there the attacker  can act like a normal employee and use authorized applications such as fi le-sharing  software or internal email to cause mischief.
Command and control.
Gaining a foothold in a network is of no use to attackers if they can’t  control their attack.
An advanced actor knows that he is likely to be discovered at some point and must be  ready to improvise by hiding and running from security teams or software.
To do this,  an attacker establishes a command-and-control channel back through the Internet to a  specifi c server so he can communicate and pass data back and forth between infected  devices and his server.
The most commonly used channel for attackers to communicate to their tools is   through regular Internet traffi c (using hypertext transfer protocol, or HTTP).
Usually  their communications will pass through defenses of traditional security tools as they  blend in with the large volume of traffi c from legitimate users.
Beacons can also contain reconnaissance  information from the compromised target, such as the operating system confi guration,  software versions, and the identity of users who are logged on to the network.
In  very complicated networks, this information can allow an attacker to quietly burrow  deeper and deeper.
Clever malware also moves beyond simple requests for command  and control and tries to emulate human behavior by using email or social networking  applications to receive its attacker commands.
Continued    197  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  Advice along the cyberattack lifecycle—cont'd  ?
If you treat your network with zero trust, as though it might already be breached, you  can start to lock down unnecessary pathways for attackers to communicate and move  around.
Segmenting networks and building internal controls on applications can act  like a fi rebreak, keeping an attacker from spreading to other parts of your network.
Attackers may have many different motivations for breaching your  network, and it’s not always for profi t. Their reasons could be data exfi ltration, defacement  of web property, or even destruction of critical infrastructure.
During this late stage, the work is usually done by an active  person issuing commands to his tools on your network.
He has a goal and a script that  is followed in a complex process that may last days, weeks, or months, but ends with  all your sensitive data slipping through a backdoor in your network.
This is one of the most diffi cult steps to stop, as an active person can improvise and   adapt to your security response efforts.
If you can discover  the attacker before he realizes he is caught, you can work to clean up his tools, while  closing doors and windows he may have used to get in.
A strong response plan will also help you prepare in advance for any mitigation efforts  needed, including the vital step of external relations if it becomes public that you have  had an incident.
Depending on the data that was accessed or stolen, you may have  regulatory or legal reporting requirements that you will need to be prepared to deal  with.
Even if the attacker is not successful at actually taking data, these requirements  may still be in place as in many cases you may not be able to determine if data was  stolen, exposed, or remained untouched.
Just like a network has vulnerabil- ities and weaknesses, so too does the attacker.
But  to  gain  this  leverage,  a  new  approach to security is needed.
¦  Why legacy approaches fail Most security architectures today resemble a  set  of  siloed  organizations,  processes,  and  technical  infrastructure.
They  have  largely   been  assembled  like  a  manufacturing  pro- duction line, where a series of security events  roll  down  a  conveyor  belt  of  individual  point  products,  while  different  staff  mem- bers  perform  their  individual  duties.
This  has been the traditional approach to security,  and historically we’ve been able to use it to  fend  off  low-level  threats.
Today we see how costly leg- acy systems can be both in their inability to  prevent targeted attacks and in their unnec- essary expense to the organization.
¦  198     BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION    One  of  the  primary  strategic  failures  of  traditional  security  architectures  is  their  reactive  approach.
Following  the  assembly- line model, security teams work to read data  logs  about  events  that  happened  to  their  network  in  the  past.
Relying on a human  in the middle of a network’s defenses is too  slow to be effective against advanced, auto- mated hacking tools and creative attackers.
A  secondary  strategic  failure  is  a  lack  of  attention  toward  ‘proactive  prevention.’  Organizations  often  don’t  do  enough  to  reduce their attack surface, allowing certain  classes  of  applications  that  are  unnecessary  for their business and leaving doors open on  their  network  by  using  port-based  policies.
By  many estimates cybercrime is now a nearly  half-trillion-dollar  industry,  and  like  any  industry, opportunity fuels more investment  and  innovation.
The  best  way  to  get  an  industry  to  collapse  in  on  itself  is  to  take  away that potential for profi t. Therefore, we  must make it so unbelievably hard for cyber  criminals  to  achieve  their  objectives  that  their only option is to invest more and more  resources to stage a successful attack, to the  point that it becomes unprofi table.
Tenets of a traditional security architecture Limited visibility.
You can’t secure what you can’t see.
Your security  architecture must eliminate blind spots by having the ability to see all applications, users,  and content across all ports and protocols (the doors and windows of your network) even  if they are encrypted.
Today’s  attackers shift techniques while they are working their way into a network in order to step  over traps laid by them for traditional defenses.
In order to fi nd the clues they leave behind,  your architecture must act like a system of systems where individual technologies work in  concert to identify and then automatically prevent attacks.
With attacks evolving at a rapid pace, it’s critical that we wean ourselves  from relying on the ‘man in the middle.’ Systems focused on detection often throw up  mountains of alerts and warnings for low-threat items, overwhelming your IT security team.
An advanced security architecture must employ a system of automation that’s constantly  learning and applying new defenses without a requirement for any manual intervention.
199  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  Stopping today’s advanced threats lies in  turning  the  economics  of  our  reality  on  its  head by preventing threats in multiple places  at each step of the cyberattack lifecycle.
This  requires  creating  an  architecture  that  can  detect  attacks  at  every  point  around  and  within a network, closing any gaps and pre- venting them from successfully launching in  the fi rst place.
¦  Prevention architecture No organization today is immune to cyber- attacks.
Cyber  criminals  are  ramping  up  activity  across  the  globe  and  utilizing  new  methods to evade traditional security meas- ures.
An effective security architecture must  not only prevent threats from entering and  damaging  the  network  but  also  take  full  advantage  of  knowledge  about  threats  in  other  security  communities.
In addi- tion, these legacy solutions are made up of a  ‘patchwork’  of  point  products  that  make  it  very diffi cult to coordinate and share intel- ligence among the various devices.
As  a  result,  security  teams  are  forced  to  invest  more  and  more  time  and  money  in  detection and remediation efforts, under the  assumption  that  prevention  is  a  lost  battle.
These  efforts  require  a  time-consuming  process  of  piecing  together  evidence  from  different devices, combing through them to  discover unknown threats, and then manu- ally creating and deploying protections.
While  nothing  will  stop  every  attack,  designing a security architecture with a pre- vention mindset (and following some of the  risk  management  best  practices  outlined  in  our  chapter,  “The  CEO’s  guide  to  driving  better  security  by  asking  the  right  ques- tions”)  can  make  cybersecurity  a  business   ¦  200   enabler.
By preventing damage to networks  and  theft  of  sensitive  information,  vital  IT  resources,  people,  and  time  are  freed  up  to  tackle  core  business  functions.
In  order  to  shift  from  a  ‘detect  and  remediate’  stature  to preventing attacks, business leaders need  to consider three cybersecurity imperatives:   1.
Process:  organize  to  reduce  your  attack   surface.
Modern  networks  can  be  a  rat’s  nest  of systems and users cobbled together  from  mergers,  legacy  architectures,  and prior acquisitions.
This confusion  leaves  many  points  of  entry  for  attackers  to  slip  in  unnoticed  and  reside  on  your  network  for  months  or  even  years.
A  critical  step  to  preventing  advanced  cyberattacks  is  to know your network better than the  attacker  does.
To  do  this  you  must  work  at  simplifying  your  architecture  down  to  manageable  pieces  that  can  be controlled, watched, and defended.
A  key  step  in  reducing  your  attack  surface  is  to  only  allow  network  traffi c  and  communications  that  are  required  to  operate  your  business  by  utilizing  technology  that  understands  the  applications,  users,  and  content  transiting your network.
This seems to  be  common  sense  that  any  unknown  traffi c  could  also  be  hiding  malicious  activity,  but  often  when  organizations  take  a  deep  look  at  their  traffi c,  they  fi nd  high-risk  applications  that  they  had  no  idea  were  running  on  their  network.
This  approach  is  also  known  as  ‘white  listing’  and  will  immediately  reduce  the scope of your security challenge by  eliminating  opportunities  for  malware  to get into your network.
Another  step  to  reducing  your  attack  surface  important  components  of  your  networks,  such  as  data  centers.
As  described  earlier,  advanced  actors  often  seek  to  break     BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION    into  a  less  secure  part  of  the  network  and  then  move  laterally  into  more  sensitive  areas.
By  segmenting  the  most  vital  parts  of  a  network  from  email or customer-facing systems, you  will be building in fi rebreaks that can  prevent the spread of a breach.
You  also  can’t  neglect  to  secure  the  endpoint  or  individual  user.
However, as we learned earlier, today’s  attacks  can  include  unknown  malware  or exploits that are essentially invisible  to antivirus software.
Finally,  it  seems  simplistic,  but  as  you  make  investments  to  re-architect  your  network and reduce your attack surface,  you have to use all those investments to  their fullest.
Purchasing next-generation  technology  is  useless  if  you  don’t  turn  it  on  and  confi gure  it  properly.
Establishing a process for staying up to  date on your security investments is one  of the most critical habits to form.
Technology:   integrate  and  automate  controls to disrupt the cyberattack lifecycle.
Don’t  use  yesterday’s  technology  to  address  today’s  and  tomorrow’s  security  challenges.
As  noted  earlier,  legacy  security  approaches  offer  individual  products  to  be  bolted  on  for single-feature solutions.
This leaves  gaps that can be broken by new methods  of attack, leaving your organization at   risk.
However,  by  using  an  integrated  cybersecurity  platform  that  protects  across  your  entire  enterprise,  your  defenses can work together to identify  and close gaps that would be exploited  by  an  attacker.
If your products  can’t  share  information  on  what  they  are  seeing,  there  is  no  chance  to  pick  up  clues  that  might  aid  in  preventing  an advanced attack.
The next step is automating prevention  measures.
Humans  have  proven  time  and again that we are the weakest link  in security.
It  just  takes  one  overlooked  log  fi le  or  one  missed  security  alert  to  bring  down  an  entire  organization.
Integration  should  also  enable  your  organization’s  agility  and  innovation.
Business  doesn’t  stop  at  the  elevator,  as  employees  take  laptops  to  work  from home or use their personal mobile  devices  to  access  your  corporate  cloud  on  the  road.
As  your  data  moves  to  enable your workforce, security should  go with it.
Choose a platform compatible  with newer technologies such as mobile,  cloud, and network virtualization.
People:  participate  in  a  community  that   shares cyberthreat information.
Organizations must educate their  constituents about what they can do on  their part to stop cyberattacks.
However,  beyond  education,  to  protect  against  today’s  truly  advanced  cyberthreats,  we  must  utilize  the  global  community  to  combine  threat  intelligence  from  a  variety  of  sources  to  help  ‘connect  the  dots.’ Real-time, global intelligence feeds  help  security  teams  keep  pace  with     201  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  threat  actors  and  easily  identify  new  security events.
By analyzing this evidence  and then sharing it, threat intelligence  from  other  organizations  can  quickly  inoculate  you  from  new  attacks  as  bad  guys  seek  to  move  between  organizations  and  even  industries.
The  network  effect  large  customer  bases  is  extremely  powerful  as it builds a security ecosystem, which  can organically respond to new threats.
Many  organizations  are  even  coming  together  to  share  threats  as  an  entire  sector.
Recent  policy  from  the  U.S.  Government  has  made  it  easier  to  collaborate  and  share  cyberthreat  information  between  companies  and  work  together  to  identify  and  stop  advanced cyber actors.
from  vendors  with   The  most  signifi cant  way  to  fi ll  in  all  the  gaps and truly protect an organization from  advanced  and  targeted  threats  is  to  imple- ment  an  integrated  and  extensible  security  platform  that  can  prevent  even  the  most  challenging  unknown  threats  across  the  entire  attack  lifecycle.
An  IT  architecture  must  remain  secure  while  also  providing  business  fl exibility  and  enabling  applica- tions  needed  to  run  day-to-day  operations.
¦  Conclusion: Cybersecurity as a business   enabler  Traditionally,  IT  security  has  been  seen  by  most organizations as a cost center, requiring  continued  expenses  but  not  bringing  in  any  revenue.
The attention and resources devoted  to  it  are  often  the  bare  minimum  to  meet   ¦  202   regulatory requirements or mandatory certifi - cations.
IT security personnel are often drafted  from projects that support core business opera- tions to work in the ‘dark corners’ of network  security  with  a  gloomy  future  of  scanning  thousands of false alarms, updating old soft- ware,  and,  of  course,  getting  blamed  for  the  inevitable  cyber  incidents  that  are  usually  caused by larger organizational problems.
This  sad tale is a reality for a shocking number of  organizations; it not only guarantees failure, it  ensures  lost  opportunity  for  innovation  that  comes from having a strong security posture.
Adopting a prevention philosophy helps  create  strategies  for  better  security  and  maximizes  the  value  of  an  organization’s  actions  and  resources.
Take  the  case  of  the  IT  security  team.
When  an  organization  decides  to  take  their  security more seriously, usually after a cyber  incident,  one  of  the  fi rst  things  they  do  is  dump more people into IT security positions.
While trained security experts are a boon for  any  organization,  the  architecture  they  are  working in can have them needlessly chasing  cycles  of  work,  wasting  budget  by  hunting  for  cyber  needles  in  digital  haystacks  of  alarms, and manually remediating countless  vulnerabilities.
Employing  a  prevention  architecture that automates protection capa- bilities and shares threat intelligence using an  integrated  platform  means  that  security  teams can operate much more effi ciently and  effectively.
Their  time  is  an  organization’s  money,  and  it’s  imperative  to  ensure  that  personnel working on core IT functions that  keep  business  operations  running  are  not  being wasted on outdated security practices.
Strong  cybersecurity  can  also  open  new  opportunities  by  making  organizations  more  fl exible  and  resilient.
Today’s  work- force is constantly connected to the Internet  at  home,  on  the  road,  and  at  their  desk.
Users  move  between  applications  and     BREAKING THE STATUS QUO: DESIGNING FOR BREACH PREVENTION    devices  seamlessly  and  expect  that  their  actions  will  translate  between  these  differ- ent  environments.
Threats  from  third-party  applications,  unsecured  cloud  environments, and infected personal mobile  devices have become so prevalent that many  traditional  security  products  will  either  block  them  completely  or  just  assume  that  they  cannot  be  protected.
Architecting a network to wrap these devic- es and third-party services into an existing  security  platform  ensures  that  data  will  remain  secure  as  workers  go  out  to  meet  with customers in the fi eld and expand busi- ness beyond its offi ce walls.
The security fi eld is stuck today with few  answers to increasingly challenging problems.
If organizations continue to view investments  in cybersecurity simply as cost centers to be  solved  by  bolting  on  legacy  technology,  we  will  all  continue  to  suffer  the  consequences.
Our most valuable data and the keys to vital  pieces of infrastructure will walk out the door  in  the  hands  of  cyber  criminals,  while  the  trust  we  have  built  between  our  customers  and  our  systems  continues  to  degrade.
This  must  not  become  the  reality  for  the  entire  community  that  receives  such  unimaginable  benefi ts from the Internet.
By adopting a pre- vention  mindset  it  is  possible  to  change  the  status quo and take back the control and trust  in systems that enable critical business opera- tions.
Cybersecurity glossary Advanced persistent threat (APT): An adversary that possesses sophisticated levels of expertise and  signifi cant resources that allow it to create opportunities to achieve its objectives by using mul- tiple attack vectors (e.g., cyber, physical, and deception).
http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary Attack surface: An information system’s characteristics that permit an adversary to probe,   attack, or maintain presence in the information system.
http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary  Antivirus software: A program that monitors a computer or network to detect or identify   major types of malicious code and to prevent or contain malware incidents, sometimes  by removing or neutralizing the malicious code.
Endpoint: Specifi c parts of an IT infrastructure that users interact with directly, such as work-  stations or mobile devices.
Exploit: A technique to breach the security of a network or information system in violation   of security policy.
http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary  Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP): Technical rules for transferring data over the Internet.
Web  browsers use HTTP, and the encrypted variant HTTPS, to allow users to interact directly  with websites in a secure manner.
http://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary  Network: Joined pieces of an IT infrastructure that transfer and route data to and from endpoints   and other networks.
Polymorphic malware: Malicious software that is designed to continuously change its appear- ance, allowing it to evade legacy security detection technology such as antivirus software.
Continued    203  ¦  DESIGN BEST PRACTICES  Cybersecurity glossary—cont'd Port-based security: Stateful inspection fi rewalls block any Internet traffi c coming into or out   of a network on a specifi c line of communication, called a port.
Remote access tools (RATs): Malicious software that allows an attacker to control a system   where he is not physically present.
Zero-day: A software vulnerability that is unknown to the public but is used by an attacker to   gain access and control of a network or system.
¦  204   SecurityRoundtable.org  Cybersecurity beyond  your network  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  Supply chain as an attack chain Booz Allen Hamilton – Bill Stewart, Executive  Vice President; Tony Gaidhane, Senior  Associate; and Laura Eise, Lead Associate  The supply chain ecosystem reaches farther and wider than  ever before.
The growing range of suppliers provides sig- nifi cant competitive advantages for companies that strate- gically  and  securely  source  from  this  global  network.
Yet  this  complex  footprint  comes  with  an  equally  complex  range of cyberthreats, and the majority of organizations do  not  realize  the  breadth  and  depth  of  these  challenges.
Threat  actors  typically  target  organizations’  supply  chains  through  two  vectors:  the  fi rst  type  of  attack  is  known  as  “adversarial  supply  chain  operations  to,”  or  “ASCO To,” and the second is known “adversarial sup- ply  chain  operations  through,”  or  “ASCO  Through”  (Figure  1).
In  an ASCO  To  attack,  your  organization  is  the  direct  target.
To  compound  this  issue,  today’s  attackers  are  often  well  funded  and  extremely  organized.
For  exam- ple, a supply chain cyber adversary may clandestinely  intercept  delivery  of  your  products  and  switch  cyber  sensitive components with a malware-infused copycat.
Nation-states,  hacktivists,  organized  criminal  groups,  and  lone  wolves  are  constantly  scanning  supply  chains   207  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  FIGURE   Adversaries  • Nation–State   Actors • Competitors (esp.
Nation–State-   owned) • Criminals • Hacktivists  ASCO Through  Attack methods on the supply chain  Lifecycle Process  Design  Source  Build  Ful?llment Distribution  Sustainment  &  Operations  Disposal  ASCO To  Example Methods: • Interdiction/Compromise • Theft/Re-route • Break/Fix subversion  Potential Effects: • Halt or slow prodution • Prevent sustainment operations • Loss of intellectual property  Customer Operations  Example Methods: • Malware shotgun infection • Malicious component insertion • Repair part compromise • Trojan insertion/Design to fail • Fraud  Potential Effects: • National security risk • Customer compromise • Impaired customer operations • Brand/Legal/Market impact • Loss of customer intellectual property  for weak points, and the impact of this atten- tion  has  the  potential  to  reverberate  well  beyond  your  supply  chain.
If one of your suppli- ers  lacks  security  controls,  you  may  absorb  their vulnerabilities.
This  includes  brand  dam- age,  operational  stoppage,  legal  exposure,  canceled sales, and government sanctions.
¦  Dangerous combination of hidden risks and   higher expectations  Tackling  cybersecurity  risk  in  supply  chain  may feel like you are trapped between a vir- tual  rock  and  a  hard  place.
As  companies  drive  to  increase  supply  chain  fl exibility  at  the  lowest  overall  cost,  sourcing  decisions  expose them to the vulnerabilities of suppli- ers  and  all  of  their  successive  networks  of  suppliers.
This  ever-evolving  cybersecurity  threat in the multi-layered supply chain pre- sents a number of challenges when manag- ing cybersecurity.
¦  208   Supply chain traditionally has been seen  as  part  of  internal  operations;  it  is  some- thing  that  happens  behind  the  scenes  for  your customers.
Companies  and  governments  around the world are realizing that the sup- ply  chain  is  an  ideal  way  for  attackers  to  quietly infi ltrate their networks and infect a  system well before customers place an order.
Companies,  large  and  small,  have  to  begin  looking  at  supply  chain  security  as  part  of  their overall supply chain risk management  process.
By prioritizing supply chain cybersecurity,  you  are  well  on  your  way  to  tackling  this  complex  issue.
You  have  an  opportunity  to  mitigate cyber risk and transform your sup- ply  chain  risk  management  capability  into  a  competitive  advantage  to  inform  your  broader business.
¦  Increasing expectations The U.S. government has been a force for driv- ing higher-level visibility and controls across  the  supply  chain.
As  the  future  progresses,     SUPPLY CHAIN AS AN ATTACK CHAIN     FIGURE   Cybersecurity challenges in the supply chain  Lack of Visibility  Limited visibility across the supply chain regarding exposure and controls  Dynamic Threat  The evolving capabilities of well-resourced and determined adversaries means  that “point in time” solutions are insuf?cient.
Cross-Functional Challenge  Requires change and collaboration from various internal business functions  to collectively manage cyber risk throughout the supply chain  Decision Making  Increased information requires new strategic and tactical decision-  making processes.
insurance  companies  will  be  an  even  larger  driver for increasing supply chain standards.
Companies  with  weak  supply  chain  cyber  security  policies  and  procedures  could  fi nd  their  insurers  raising  their  premiums  or  excluding claims in case of a breach.
The next  wave  of  standards  could  take  shape  with  requiring  you  to  maintain  a  list  of  all  cyber  sensitive supply chain components as well as  develop  comprehensive  risk  frameworks  to  classify,  prioritize,  and  proactively  manage  the  sourcing  of  each  of  those  components.
You  need  to  proactively  get  ahead  of  these  standards.
Prove to the government, insurers,   and  your  customers  that  you  have  a  strong  supply chain cyber cybersecurity capability.
Private sector clients are real- izing  that  securing  high  assurance  services  on  an  untrusted  hardware  platform  is  the  same  as  building  a  fort  on  a  foundation  of  shifting sand.
They want to know the depth  of  visibility  into  the  components  and  ser- vices of products, and they want to be reas- sured  that  there  are  controls  in  place  to  manage a robust supply chain cybersecurity  program.
As with the government, many of  these  requests  and  requirements  are  at  an     209  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  all-time high and will become more sophis- ticated  and  comprehensive only during the  next several years.
¦   How to create both a secure and compliant   capability  Complying with standards and guidelines is  not enough for securing all of the factors you  need to comprehensively increase your secu- rity  posture.
Although  standards  strive  to  create consistency among cybersecurity pro- grams, the fundamental truth is that there is  no  formula  for  security.
Standards  and  frameworks can help identify the landscape  of potential areas to address and may let you  set  a  minimum  level  of  performance,  but  that’s  it.
Supply  chain  cybersecurity  is  more  than an IT problem.
If not used in the appro- priate  context,  standards  can  be  a  generic  solution to a highly individualized problem  set.
Supply  chain  risk  is  tied  intimately  to  your business strategy and operations, and it  must be tailored to your organization.
Rather  than  focusing  on  a  standard,  look  at  your program with a maturity lens.
Then,  within  a  well-established  structure,  decide  where you need to invest and develop.
It is  up  to  you  to  prioritize  the  control  areas  to  address.
A  maturity  approach  is  not  “one  size  fi ts  all.”  Special considerations for your organization   could necessitate that your approach be dif- ferent  than  that  of  a  competitor.
It allows you to focus  on  increasing  your  overall  security  and  to  stay ahead of the curve.
Developing a robust supply  chain  cyberse- curity  program  is  complex,  but  that  doesn’t  mean  your  approach  has  to  be.
It  requires  a  risk-based prioritization approach to changes  in  policy,  supplier  contracts,  resource  alloca- tion, and investment.
Your  organization  needs  a  plan  for  the  path  forward in securing your supply chain.
Before  you transition to developing a roadmap, you  must  begin  with  a  maturity  assessment.
Supply chain cybersecurity program maturity  assessments are simply gap analyses between  how  well  your  program  operates  today  com- pared with how it should operate in a target  state.
To evaluate this, you must identify the  key  controls  that  apply  to  supply  chain  risk  management—either controls you already use  as  part  of  your  corporate  cybersecurity  pro- gram or controls that may be more unique to  supply  chain.
Maturity Assessment Tip The set of controls you select for your maturity assessment should incorporate the compli- ance standards that customers might use as part of their Request for Proposal requirements  (e.g., NIST SP 800-161).
You likely will cover more controls than these standards, but map- ping them will allow you to kill two birds with one stone.
¦  210     SUPPLY CHAIN AS AN ATTACK CHAIN     Five Common Early Wins Below are fi ve common ways you can gain early traction with your supply chain cybersecurity program:  ?
Include cyber in your supply chain risk management framework  ?
Enhance monitoring of supplier network access points  Next,  identify  key  objectives  for  each  control  you  plan  to  evaluate.
Threat  intelligence,  for  example,  may  have  data  collection,  analysis,  and  distribution  as  key  control  objectives.
This will help you surface risks asso- ciated  with  each  control.
After  the  baseline,  defi ne the target state for each control.
The tar- get  state  should  be  a  balance  between  high  effectiveness  and  practical  costs,  keeping  in  mind that not all controls need the highest level  of maturity.
The outcome of your maturity assessment will  be a robust roadmap designed to transform your  supply  chain  cybersecurity  program.
This  equates to quick wins and key priorities for your  organization.
It should also help address the key  requirements your customers demand.
For example, during the dis- tribution  phase,  threat  actors  can  intercept   physical deliveries of products, place malware in  cyber sensitive components, and allow the ship- ments  to  continue  to  end  customers.
This prior- itized  list  becomes  your  risk  agenda  and  helps  determine what to address fi rst to enhance your  supply chain cybersecurity program.
To assess the visibility, control, and risks in your  supply chain, select a few key product lines and  decompose them into their cyber sensitive com- ponents.
Then  see  how  much  information  you  can  collect  on  their  manufacturing  sources,  acceptance testing, suppliers, and intended cus- tomers.
You  will  likely  fi nd  that  your  internal  systems  and  policies  are  prohibiting  you  from  this level of visibility; however, it is this level of  visibility that customers will be demanding in     211  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  the future, if not already.
Once you can obtain  this kind of visibility, you can then assess the  processes,  controls,  and  risks  associated  with  those cyber sensitive components.
¦   Supply chain cybersecurity as a differentiator The  risks  and  expectations  of  your  supply  chain cybersecurity are increasing as threats  become  more  sophisticated  and  customers’  expectations rise.
Compliance is not enough; you  must  develop  a  robust  maturity  model  to  help identify your vulnerabilities and devel- op a roadmap to reduce your risks.
Companies  that  are  able  to  effectively  manage their supply chain risks will have the   advantage in the market.
Understanding how  to  identify  risk  and  then  effectively  manage  those  risks  will  allow  you  to  be  in  greater  control of your supply chain.
A robust supply  chain  cyber  risk  management  program  will  allow  you  to  close  vulnerabilities,  making  you less of a target for attackers while helping  you  meet  and  even  shape  your  customer  expectations.
The trust in your brand and the  quality  of  your  product  depend  on  the  strength of your supply chain cybersecurity.
Creating  the  right  balance  of  security  and  resilience  in  your  supply  chain  will  allow you to build a foundationally strong- er  supply  chain  cybersecurity  program.
¦  212   SecurityRoundtable.org  Managing risk associated  with third-party outsourcing Covington & Burling LLP – David N. Fagan, Partner;  Nigel L. Howard, Partner; Kurt Wimmer, Partner; Elizabeth H.  Canter, Associate; and Patrick Redmon, Summer Associate  ¦   Third-party outsourcing and cybersecurity risk Businesses  increasingly  work  with  third  parties  in  ways  that  can  render  otherwise  well-guarded  data  vulnerable  to attack or accidental disclosure.
These third parties can  include  technology  service  providers;  other  major  busi- ness  function  vendors,  such  as  payroll,  insurance,  and  benefi ts companies; and accounting and fi nance, advertis- ing,  delivery  and  lettershop,  legal,  and  other  consulting  services.
Many of these commercial relationships require sensi- tive information—whether the business’ own confi dential  business  information  or  the  personal  information  of  its  employees or customers—to be shared with, or stored by,  the third parties.
Such relationships also may entail third- party access to a company’s networks.
There is, in turn, an  inherent  risk  in  the  third-party  services:  they  can  create  new  avenues  of  attack  against  a  company’s  data  or  its  systems and networks—and those avenues require appro- priate mitigation.
Perhaps  no  data  security  breach  highlighted  this  risk  more than the incident incurred by Target.
That incident  began not with a direct attack on the Target network but  with a phishing attack on a Pennsylvania HVAC contrac- tor that had access to Target’s external billing and project  management portals.
Once the  phishing  campaign  succeeded  in  installing  key-logging  malware,  the  hackers  obtained  the  HVAC  contractor’s  credentials  to  Target’s  external  billing  and  project  man- agement systems and from there infi ltrated Target’s inter- nal network, eventually reaching Target’s customer data- bases and point-of-sale systems.
213  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  The  results  of  the  Target  breach  are  well  known:  the  personal  information  of  up  to  70 million customers was compromised, and  about  40  million  customers  had  their  credit  or debit card information stolen.
These  costs  include the litigation and settlement expens- es  resulting  from  lawsuits  brought  by  con- sumers and credit card issuers.
Even more trou- bling,  40  percent  of  the  respondents  to  another Ponemon survey named third-party  access to or management of sensitive data as  one  of  the  top  two  barriers  to  improving  cybersecurity.
However,  despite  the  cybersecurity  risks  posed  by  third-party  service  providers,  many  companies  fail  to  systematically  address such risks.
Only 52 percent of com- panies surveyed in a 2014 Ponemon Institute  report have a program in place to systemati- cally manage third-party cybersecurity risk.
¦   Legal risks Although  there  are  many  commercial  and  other reasons to adopt strong third-party risk  management  processes,  a  variety  of  legal  frameworks require the management of third- party risk.
Examples of such statutory or regu- latory requirements include the following:   ?
the  Interagency  Guidelines  Establishing  Information  Security  Standards  that  implement  Section  501  of  the  Gramm- Leach-Bliley  Act  and  require  fi nancial  institutions to engage in due diligence in  the  selection  of  service  providers,  to  use   ¦  214   contractual  provisions  to  manage  third- party risk, and, in some cases, to monitor  service  providers  on  an  ongoing  basis  (e.g.,  12  C.F.R.
the  HIPAA  Privacy  Rule,  requiring  specifi c contractual provisions in dealing  with  business  associates  who  handle  protected  health  information,  45  C.F.R.
state   regulations,   as  for   such  Standards   the  the  Massachusetts  Information,  Protection  of  Personal  requiring  reasonable  steps  in  selecting  third  parties  and  the  use  of  contractual  provisions  to  require  their  compliance  with  Massachusetts  law,  201  Mass  Code  Regs.
§45 (governing unfair  acts and deceptive trade practices) to apply  to  cybersecurity  and  data  security,  and  has  taken  action  against  companies  that  fail  to  take  “reasonable  steps  to  select  and  retain  service  providers  capable  of  appropriately  safeguarding  personal  information”  a  de  facto regulatory requirement.
¦   Sources of third-party cybersecurity risk The  cybersecurity  and  privacy  risks  gener- ated by third-party engagements include the  following:   ?
breaches  of  personal  data—whether  the  personal data of customers or employees— and  the  attendant  regulatory  obligations  (e.g., notifi cation requirements), as well as  legal liability, as in the Target breach   ?
breaches of a business’s proprietary data,   including the following:  ?
competitively sensitive data, privileged  information,  attorney  work  product,  and trade secrets   ?
data  that  result  in  fi nancial  harm  to  the  company,  such  as  bank  account  information  information    ?
other  confi dential,  market  moving  insider  in  the  hands  of  third  parties  such  as  investment  bankers, consultants, and lawyers, such  as  information  regarding  nonpublic  M&A  activity,  clinical  trial  results,  or  regulatory approvals   ?
the introduction into internal networks  of  viruses  or  other  malicious  code,  as  in  the  Dairy  Queen  attack,  in  which  vendor  credentials  were  used  to  gain  access  to  internal  networks  and  eventually  install  malware  targeting  point-of-sale systems   ?
the introduction of other vulnerabilities  to  IT  systems,  for  instance,  by  the  use  of  vulnerable  third-party  applications  or  code,  as  occurred  in  the  Heartbleed  OpenSSL  that  potentially  exposed  the  data  transmitted  to  and  from secure web servers  exploit    ?
“fourth-party”  risk,  that  is,  the  third- party  cybersecurity  risks  introduced  by  a  vendor’s  relationships  with  its  own  third-party  service  providers  and  vendors   ?
potential director or management liability  for breach of fi duciary duty in the exercise  of cybersecurity oversight.
To help manage this array of risks effectively,  companies may consider whether they have  appropriate procedures in place to evaluate  and monitor individual vendors, as well as a  program to manage and monitor third-party  relationships.
¦   Engagement-level management of third-party   cybersecurity risk  The appropriate measures needed to scruti- nize  and  monitor  third-party  service  pro- viders  will  depend  to  a  large  extent  upon     MANAGING RISK ASSOCIATED WITH THIRD-PARTY OUTSOURCING     the  sophistication  of  the  vendor  and  the  nature  of  the  IT  systems  and  data  at  issue.
Nonetheless, three elements are common to  all third-party risk management:   1.  due  diligence  prior  to  entering  an   engagement   2.  contractual  commitments  and  legal  risk   management   3.  ongoing monitoring and oversight.
¦   Pre-engagement due diligence A  critical  element  of  managing  third-party  risk  is  the  assessment  of  the  third  party’s  own  security  practices  and  posture  before  any contract is signed.
Such diligence is cru- cial for the identifi cation and evaluation of  risks, and, in turn, can ensure that such risks  are  mitigated  before  the  engagement,  including  through  the  use  of  contractual  provisions.
The  actual  evaluation  may  be  more  ad  hoc  (i.e.,  conversations  with  key  business or technology stakeholders) or for- mal  (i.e.,  through  a  questionnaire  or  even  on-site  assessment),  and  the  extent  of  an  evaluation  may  depend  on  various  factors  in  the  prospective  relationship,  including,  for  example,  whether  the  service  provider  will  have  access  to  the  company’s  IT  sys- tems,  the  nature  of  the  information  that  it  may  access,  and  whether  it  will  store  such  information.
Depending  on  the  extent  of  the  relation- ship  and  information  that  may  be  accessed  by the vendor, the following areas of inquiry  may be necessary to inform a cybersecurity  diligence assessment:  experienced    ?
whether  and  how  often  the  vendor  cybersecurity  has  incidents  in  the  past,  the  severity  of  those incidents, and the quality of the  vendor’s response   ?
whether   the   vendor  maintains  cybersecurity  policies,  such  as  whether  the vendor has a written security policy  or plan   ?
organizational  considerations,  such  as  whether  the  vendor  maintains  suffi cient  and  appropriately  trained  personnel  to     215  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  protect  the  data  and/or  service  at  issue  and respond to incidents   ?
human  resources  practices,  particularly  background  screening  of  employees,  cybersecurity  training,  and  the  handling  of terminations   ?
access  controls,  particularly  whether  controls  are  in  place  that  restrict  access  to  information  and  uniquely  identify  users  such  that  access  attempts  can  be  monitored and reviewed   ?
encryption  practices,  including  whether  information is encrypted at rest, whether  information  transmitted  to  or  from  the  vendor  is  properly  encrypted,  and  whether cryptographic keys are properly  managed   ?
physical  security,  including  resilience  and  disaster  recovery  functions  and  the  use  of  personnel  and  technology  to  prevent unauthorized physical access to  facilities   ?
back-up and recovery practices  ?
change  control  management,  including  protocols  on  the  installation  of  and  execution of software   ?
system  acquisition,  development,  and  maintenance to manage risk from software  development  or  the  deployment  of  new  software or hardware   ?
risk  management  of  the  vendor’s  own   third-party vendors   ?
incident   response  plans,   including  whether  evidence  of  an  incident  is  collected  and  retained  so  as  to  be  presentable  to  a  court  and  whether  the  vendor  periodically  tests  its  response  capabilities   ?
whether  the  vendor  conducts  regular,  independent  audits  of  its  privacy  and  information security practices  ¦  216   ¦   Contractual risk and negotiation In addition to evaluating third parties on the  basis of their cybersecurity practices, anoth- er important risk mitigation tool is the actual  contractual  language.
As  with  other  areas,  contractual requirements can be an effective  way  to  allocate  risk  and  responsibility  for  potential  breaches  of  cybersecurity,  includ- ing  the  investigation  and  remediation  of  such incidents.
Commonly negotiated terms  include the following:   ?
a  requirement  that  the  vendor  have  a  written  information  security  program  that  complies  with  applicable  law  or  other regulatory or industry standards   ?
restrictions  on  secondary  use  of  data,  including making clear that the customer  remains the owner of any data transmitted  to the vendor and any derivatives of that  data   ?
mandatory and timely notifi cation in case   of a security incident   ?
in case of a breach, a requirement that the  vendor  take  on  reasonable  measures  to  correct its security processes and take any  necessary remediation steps   ?
In  addition  to  such  terms,  indemnifi cation  clauses can be used to shift the risk of data  breach onto the third party and to incentiv- ize healthy security practices.
To  ensure capacity to take on the fi nancial costs   of  a  breach,  third  parties  are  frequently  required to obtain a cybersecurity insurance  policy.
However,  vendors  often  push  for  caps  on  their  cybersecurity  liability.
To  guide  negotiations as to appropriate caps on liabil- ity,  consider  the  type  of  data  processed  or  accessed by the third party (e.g., how sensi- tive  is  it,  does  it  relate  to  employees,  con- sumers,  or  is  it  not  personally  identifying  information),  the  volume  of  records  to  be  handled by the third party, the ability for the  customer  to  implement  security  controls  such as encryption, the nature and extent of  the  third-party  promises  on  cybersecurity,  and  the  brand  and  reputation  of  the  third  party with respect to data security.
¦   Ongoing monitoring and oversight Ongoing monitoring and oversight of third- party service providers is essential given the  rapidly changing landscape of cybersecurity  threats.
Whereas  due  diligence  provides  a  snapshot  of  a  third  party’s  cybersecurity  stance  at  a  specifi c  point  in  time,  continual  monitoring and the right to such monitoring  are  necessary  to  help  ensure  that  the  third  party responds and adapts to secure its sys- tems against new threats.
Over the life of the  relationship,  periodic  checks,  including  on- site  reviews  of  vendor,  can  be  important  oversight  mechanisms.
Other  monitoring  requirements  include  access  to  timely  and  accurate  records  and  reports  of  the  third- party provider’s cybersecurity posture.
MANAGING RISK ASSOCIATED WITH THIRD-PARTY OUTSOURCING     Although relatively uncommon outside  of certain regulated industries, such as the  fi nancial and health-care industries, provi- sions in vendor contracts for regular secu- rity  audits  by  an  independent  third  party  provide  a  robust  but  intrusive  form  of  periodic  monitoring.
Alternatively,  the  vendor  could  be required to provide up-to-date certifi ca- tions  of  compliance  with  industry  stand- ards  or  regular,  third-party  audit  reports.
In  addition,  to  manage  fourth-party  risk,  vendors could be required to perform ini- tial and periodic assessments of their own  service providers and vendors if they will  be  handling  sensitive  information.
If,  in  the  course  of  an  audit,  vulnerabilities  are  identifi ed  or  practices  are  found  that  are  not  in  compliance  with  industry  practices  or  regulatory  requirements,  the  vendor  may  be  required  to  notify  the  customer  and  correct  any  outstanding  issues  in  a  timely fashion.
As part of ongoing monitoring of vendor  cybersecurity, it is useful if the contract with  a  third-party  service  provider  also  includes  notifi cation  and  remediation  provisions  if  the vendor becomes aware of defi ciencies in  its cybersecurity posture.
¦   Conclusion The  measures  described  above—diligence,  contractual  terms,  and  continued  monitor- ing and oversight—are critical elements of a  comprehensive  cybersecurity  program  that  includes managing third-party relationships.
To effectuate these elements, in turn, it often     217  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  is  helpful  to  have  standardized  processes  and documentation.
Examples include standardized diligence  checklists and questionnaires, template con- tract  addendums  addressing  cybersecurity  issues,  and  standardized  schedules  for  audits  and  other  forms  of  monitoring.
Because there is no one-size-fi ts-all approach  that  is  appropriate  for  every  vendor,  it  is  appropriate to implement a tiered approach   that scales due diligence, contractual obliga- tions,  and  oversight  processes  according  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  cybersecurity  risks  presented  by  the  vendor  relationship.
¦  218   SecurityRoundtable.org  A new look at an old threat  in cyberspace: The insider Delta Risk LLC – Thomas Fuhrman, President  insider threat is to take it seriously.“  “The fi rst thing that business leaders should do about the   People  are,  without  doubt,  the  most  consequential  part  of  cybersecurity.
They  design  the  hardware,  write  the  software,  build  the  systems,  confi gure  and  manage  the  boxes,  install  the  software  patches,  and,  obviously,  use  the computers.
Whether they realize it, people are a major  security  risk.
The  idea  of  the  ‘enemy  within’ is as old as the hills, and its cyber equivalent is too.
The insider threat to computer systems and networks  has been a recognized reality for decades.
It was a topic in  1970 in the landmark report by the RAND Corporation,  Security  Controls  for  Computer  Systems,  and  its  roots  go  back  even  further.
However,  since  2013  when  defense  computer  systems  contractor  Edward  Snowden—an  insider—carried  out  one  of  the  largest  and  most  signifi - cant  unauthorized  disclosures  of  classifi ed  government  information in U.S. history, the issue was brought home to  business executives.
They realized, “If that can happen to  the National Security Agency, it can happen to me.”  ¦   What’s new with the insider threat?
In this, the post-Snowden era, the potential impact of the  insider has become a much more tangible issue to compa- nies and organizations of every kind.
However, although  this  heightened  awareness  is  new,  there  are  also  other  recent developments that make the current insider threat  challenge more diffi cult than ever.
the  vast  amount  of  vital  business  and  personal  data   that is online  219  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK   ?
the migration of data outside the security  perimeter  of  the  enterprise  through  the  widespread  adoption  of  cloud- based  services,  increased  outsourcing,  increasingly  Internet-enabled  supply  chain  operations,  and  the  ubiquity  of  mobile  communications  and  computing  devices  in  the  ‘bring  your  own  device’  (BYOD) environment   ?
the  increase  in  the  marketability  of  sensitive,  personal,  proprietary,  or  confi dential  data  through  global  cyber  crime syndicates and hacker networks.
These  developments  in  combination  invest  more  power—and  risk—in  the  individual  insider and make ‘keeping a secret while selec- tively sharing it’ a harder problem than ever.
From  a  cyber  perspective,  the  insider  is  the person who the enterprise has entrusted  to  access  and  operate  with  the  company’s  data  and  information  resources  in  the  rou- tine  course  of  business.
Anyone  who  has  legitimate  (or  ‘authorized’)  access  to  the  information and the business systems, data- bases, email, or other information resources  of the enterprise is an insider.
This  group  includes  former  employees,  contractors,  business  partners,  vendors, suppliers, and others such as cloud  service  providers  and  business  application  hosting  services  that  have  been  granted  access  to  corporate  enterprise  networks.
Evidence indicates that the access privileges  of  such  non-employee  insiders  are  diffi cult  to manage and thus more easily exploited.
In  the large data breach at The Home Depot in  2014,  for  example,  the  hackers  entered  the  corporate network through a vendor’s legiti- mate access credentials.
Better ways   ¦  220   to effi ciently screen potential employees, man- age access rights, enforce obligations, detect  malicious  tendencies  and  behaviors,  and  implement security controls are needed.
Although  these  two  types of insider are very different in motiva- tions  and  objectives,  they  can  have  similar  ruinous effects on the organization.
This  rogue  employee,  at  most  a  small  percentage  of  the  workforce  (Spectorsoft  reports  that  an  estimated  10  percent  of  employees  account  for  95  percent  of  incidents), uses her or his legitimate access  to  a  company’s  information  resources  to  deliberately harm the organization.
Malicious insiders know about the organi- zation’s information, its systems, its struc- ture  and  people,  and  its  internal  opera- tions.
They  have  access  to  the  enterprise  network from inside the perimeter defens- es.
Those with privileged  access can do even more, such as disabling  accounts,  destroying  backups,  changing  confi guration fi les, and more.
Those with- out  privileged  access  can  sometimes  get  it  through  insider  trickery,  bypassing  authentication processes or gaining access  through the credentials of others.
Snowden  himself  reportedly  persuaded  colleagues  to share passwords with him to get access  beyond what he was already allowed.
A  fundamental  and  important  point  to  recognize is that the insider as a malicious  threat is not limited to the cyber and infor- mation  systems  realm.
Other  targets  and  methods  are  possible,  including  physical  theft,  destruction,  or  violence,  coercion  and extortion, or other non-cyber actions.
In short, an insider  can  become  a  threat  for  many  reasons—  including for example, anger as a result of  workplace  confl icts  or  disputes,  fear  of  termination,  dissatisfaction  with  work- place policies, ideology, or fi nancial need.
Almost anyone can  fall into the category of unwitting insider  threat agent, including senior executives.
As  a  threat  actor,  the  unwitting  insider  unintentionally  unknowingly  makes  security  blunders  that  expose  the  enterprise to serious cyber risks.
One  group  of  insiders  who  can  pose  a  major threat are those who have a lax atti- tude about security.
Security  awareness  cam- paigns are so commonplace now that just  about everyone exercises at least some cau- tion in online activities.
The same person who would refrain from  using the word ‘password’ as a password  or from writing it on a sticky note to place  on the computer monitor may think noth- ing of other poor security practices.
People have become  so accustomed to online life—being always  connected, using multiple computing plat- forms,  putting  their  ‘whole  life’  (as  they  say) on their smartphones, or posting pho- tos  and  personal  information  on  social  websites—that  it  appears  many  have     A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER    become  unconcerned  about  the  associated  security and privacy risks.
Users sometimes  bring such personal Internet habits into the  workplace,  often  paradoxically  because  of  their zeal to do their jobs.
(“I  needed  to  work  on  the  fi le—what  was  I  supposed  to  do?”)  They  could sync a personal smartphone to a cor- porate  computer.
(“I need to work  on it while I travel.”) The list continues.
All  of these actions and many others like them  by  the  unwitting  insider  create  serious  enterprise security risks.
The  single  most  common  security  weak- ness  of  most  people  is  a  susceptibility  to  phishing  attacks.
Phishing  is  a  form  of  ‘social  engineering’  that  has  the  goal  of  getting  information  such  as  usernames,  passwords,  or  credit  card  numbers.
This  bogus  website  prompts  the  user  to  enter  information  such  as  log-in  credentials  or  account  numbers.
If  the  user’s suspicions have not been aroused,  she or he may enter the requested data— and gotcha!—the hacker has succeeded in  capturing information that can be used for  access  later.
Alternatively  or  in  addition,  the bogus website may push out a virus,  remote access software, key-logging soft- ware, or other malware.
221  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  that   Phishing  also  is  used  in  a  more  focused  way  targets  specific  people— frequently senior executives or people in  the  organization  who  have  privileged  access  to  information  resources.
The  hacker will mine the Internet for personal  information  on  the  target,  information  that  only  the  target  would  know,  names  and  contact  information  of  colleagues,  web  browsing  and  purchase  history,  non-business  activities  and  community  involvement, even writing styles to zoom  in  on  that  specifi c  person.
When  such  information  is  used  in  a  phishing  email,  the look and feel, the text, and the context  of the message can appear unexceptional  and entirely authentic.
However,  whether the result of inadvertent or delib- erate  acts,  the  impact  to  the  organization  can  be  the  same—fi nancial  loss,  compro- mise of intellectual property, theft of cus- tomer  personal  information  and  credit  card data, and reputational harm or loss of  competitive position.
Such actors explic- itly seek to exploit insiders by appropri- ating  their  credentials  and  moving  unnoticed within the network.
FIGURE  Insider threat actors and their effects  Threat Actors  Motivations  Methods  Unwitting insider  • Ef?ciency and    convenience • Customer service • `Getting the job done ́  • Move sensitive internal data to a    public cloud • Lose a laptop • Use a memory stick to import or    export data • Mix company data with personal    data on moblie devices  Malicious insider  • Financial gain • Do harm to the company • Advance an ideology or    other personal agenda  • Use legitimate access for    illegitimate purposes  Malicious outsider   posing as an  insider  • Financial gain—obtain    sensistive data that can    be monetized • Fraud or theft of money • Do harm to the company • Advance an ideology or    other personal agenda  • Exploit the access of a    legitimate user • Bypass security controls on    privilege escalation and lateral    movement throughout the    network to get to key systems    for ex?ltration and/or    insertion of malware  Results  Cyber Incident  s e m o c t u o   e m a s   e h t   e v a h   n a c   s t a e r h t   r e d i s n i   l l  A  Examples • Theft of sensitive    information (e.g.,    personally identi?able    information, intellectual    property, proprietary    information) • Financial fraud or theft • Insertion of malware    and/or establishing a    long-term presence in    the network for repeat    action • Damaged or destroyed    information resources • Sabotaged product (the    merchandise produced    by the enterprise) • Reputation harm and    customer alienation; loss    of revenue  ¦  222    ?
This  type  of  insider  is  not  an  insider  in  the  true  sense,  but  rather  an  imposter  who  uses  the  legitimate  credentials  of  others  to  access  the  network  in  ways  the  real  user  would  not.
He then uses these  acquired  credentials  to  access  password  fi les,  directories  and  access  control  lists,  and  other  network  resources—which  is  made easier if the credentials are already  those  of  a  system  administrator  or  other  privileged user.
Upon achieving initial  access, the hacker may try to move later- ally  within  the  network  or  to  escalate  access  privileges  to  implant  advanced  malware  deeply  in  the  network  fabric.
Phishing  is  the  dominant  mechanism  used today to penetrate networks by even  the most sophisticated hackers because it  has a high success rate for very low cost.
Other  social  engineering  tactics  include  in-person  deceit,  such  as  impersonating  someone in authority, pretending to rep- resent the Help Desk, asking someone for  assistance,  or  claiming  to  have  left  an  access badge inside the restricted area of a  facility.
Hackers have tricks other than social engi- neering  to  obtain  the  access  they  desire.
The  sophistication  we  hear  about in reports of state-sponsored espio- nage,  hacker  networks,  and  organized     A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER    cybercrime  is  exhibited  in  the  tradecraft  that  is  applied  once  the  initial  breach  is  achieved.
The  outsider-posing-as-insider  is  not  interested  in  impersonating  a  particular  person other than to use the person’s net- work  or  system  credentials.
Unlike  the true insider, the only observables that  the  outsider  leaves  are  those  network  footprints and fi ngerprints that may show  up in system logs or the actual malware  code  or  other  digital  fragments  they  leave behind.
Nevertheless, recent insider  threat surveys and breach data analyses are  consistent in their main fi ndings, including  the following:   ?
Most organizations do not have adequate  controls  in  place  to  prevent  or  thwart  insider attacks.
Third  parties  and  other  non-employee  insiders  represent  a  major  risk,  and  insuffi cient  attention  to  managing  them.
Most  contracts  and  service  level  agreements  with  external  vendors, suppliers, and business partners  do not include robust security provisions.
Insider policy violations and inappropriate  activity are often discovered only during     223  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  examination  of  user  devices  after  individuals have left the organization.
Most  incidents  are  handled  internally  with no legal nor law enforcement action.
Although there is widespread recogni- tion  that  the  threat  is  very  serious,  in  most  sectors there is insuffi cient follow-through to  build the threat-specifi c plans, organization- al  structures,  and  controls  to  deal  with  it.
Technology by  itself  is  not  the  answer;  the  critical  human  dimension of the insider threat must also be  addressed.
A  comprehensive  approach  would   include the following:   ?
Factors for achieving this  include the following:  ?
This  should  be a formal signed agreement between  the  company  and  each  employee  and  external  party  who  has  access  to  the  enterprise IT resources or facilities.
Create  a  safe  environment  in  which  to  self-report  accidental  actions  that  jeopardize  security.
Removing  the  stigma  of  having  inadvertently  committed a security violation can help  minimize  impact  and  help  everyone  learn.
An  organized  phishing  awareness  exercise  program  can  raise  the  company’s  standard  of  performance in this critical area.
Establish  a  set  of  institutional  values  refl ecting  the  desired  culture,  select  leaders  based  on  their  adherence  to  include  demonstration  of  these  values  as  an  item  on  employee  performance  assessments.
Establish  an  executive  committee  to  manage  an  integrated  multidisciplinary  program  designed  to  deter,  prevent,  detect,  and  respond  to  insider  threats  and  to  limit  their  impact.
The  program  should  have  the  active  participation  of  the  functional  organizations  across  the  business such as Risk, IT, Cybersecurity,  Physical  Security,  Human  Resources,  Fraud,  and  General  Counsel,  as  well  as  company-specific  verticals  (manufacturing, operations, etc.).
The program should include the following:  ?
creation  and  oversight  of  policies  related  to  the  management  of  insider  risk   ?
regularized  workfl ow,  processes,  and  meetings  to  actively  and  collectively  review  threat  intelligence,  the  internal  threat  landscape,  internal  indicators  of  risk, insider events, sponsored activities,  and trends from each subdiscipline   ?
implementation  and  oversight  of  personnel  reliability  processes  from  pre-employment  background  checks  to  off-boarding  procedures  to  assess  and  act  upon  personnel  security  indicators,  risks,  behavioral  risk  and  to  compromise  individual  vulnerability    ?
defi nition of requirements for employee  training  and  awareness  of  insider  threats and prevention measures.
Building  and  operating  security  controls.
Many of the security controls that already  exist (or should exist) within the enterprise  can be effective in detecting, preventing,  or mitigating the results of insider threat  activity.
Key technical controls include the  following:  ?
access   controls,  particularly   privileged  administrative authority)  users   for  (those  with    ?
data  protection,  including  encryption,  data  loss  prevention  technology,  data  backups, and exfi ltration monitoring   ?
confi guration management and secure   confi gurations   ?
vulnerability and patch management  ?
internal network segmentation.
The most signifi cant sources  of  cyber-related  technical  intelligence  are  the  real-time  alerts  and  outputs  of  security  appliances,  network-  and  host-based  sensors,  and  data  loss  prevention  tools,  as  well  as  the  network-  and  system-level  logs  that  are  generated  automatically  (if  so  confi gured) throughout the enterprise.
In  most  enterprises  these  sources  provide  so  much  data  that  managing  and  effectively  integrating  it  with  operations become serious challenges.
Insider  threat-tracking  tools  in  use  today,  such  as  data  loss  prevention,  threat  security  information  and  event  management   intelligence,  and        A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER    (SIEM)  systems,  pinpoint  potentially  illicit  identifying  anomalies  in  a  person’s  IT  resource  and data access patterns.
Integrating  operational intelligence information at  the intersection of cybersecurity, fraud  detection,  and  physical  security  can  yield  critical  insights  about  potential  insider threats.
Examples  of  non-technical  cyber  data   include the following:  ?
workday activities: patterns of on/ off duty time, including weekdays,  weekends, and holidays; location   ?
It is important that the company’s legal  counsel advise the executive committee  on  informing  employees  of  ongoing  monitoring  and  how  the  data  will  be  used.
The  executive  committee  should  develop  a  detailed  (though  confi dential)  action  plan  for  what  to  do  in the event of actual or suspected insider     225  ¦  CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  misbehavior  or  law-breaking.
The  executive  committee  should  refi ne  the  program  as  the  organization  matures  in  the  use  of  this capability within the specifi c business  environment.
Proven approaches and  practices  for  addressing  this  threat  are  available, allowing the company to build  on  the  learnings  of  other  organizations.
Commitment,  loyalty,  and general affi liation with the organization  cannot be taken for granted.
Personal ethics  and allegiance to the employer collide with  the  chance  for  selfi sh  gains  in  those  who  have  become  security  risks  or  who  are  vulnerable  to  compromise.
Each provides a wealth of  information on proven approaches and practices that companies can build upon.
This tool is designed to help the user   gauge an organization’s relative vulnerability to insider threats and adverse behavior  including espionage against the U.S., theft of intangible assets or intellectual property,  sabotage or attacks against networks or information systems, theft or embezzlement,  illegal export of critical technology, and domestic terrorism or collaboration with  foreign terrorist groups.
The tool can be used for a number of purposes, including self-audit of an organization’s   current defenses against insider abuse, the development of a strategic risk mitigation  plan, and employee training and awareness.
Since 2001, the CERT Insider Threat Center has   conducted empirical research and analysis to develop and transition socio-technical  solutions to combat insider cyberthreats.
Partnering with the U.S. Department of  Defense, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Secret Service, other  federal agencies, the intelligence community, private industry, academia, and the  vendor community, the CERT Insider Threat Center is positioned as a trusted broker  that can provide short-term assistance to organizations and conduct ongoing research.
This brochure provides an introduction for managers and security personnel on how   to detect an insider threat and provides tips on how to safeguard trade secrets.
https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/counterintelligence/the-insider-threat  ¦  226     A NEW LOOK AT AN OLD THREAT IN CYBERSPACE: THE INSIDER    authorization to access company and infor- mation  resources,  a  rogue  insider  can  do  tremendous  harm  to  the  company.
A  momentary  and  unintentional  lapse in vigilance regarding security threats  can be all it takes for a major compromise to   occur.
However, there is much that the organi- zation’s  executive  leadership  can  do  to  mitigate the insider threat, including estab- lishing  the  right  culture,  implementing  security controls, conducting ongoing mon- itoring  and  detection  efforts,  and  being  ready to respond quickly if indicators point  to a likely insider threat.
Create a safe environment in which to self-report accidental actions that jeopardize   security.
Build and operate security controls designed to mitigate the insider risk.
look inside the network for observables of potential insider threat activity    5.
Be ready to develop your approach as conditions continue to change.
Best practices can be implemented based on another organization’s learning  curve.
SecurityRoundtable.org     227  ¦  The Internet of Things The Chertoff Group – Mark Weatherford, Principal  In the time it takes you to read this sentence—about eight  seconds—approximately 150 new devices will have been  added to the Internet of Things (IoT).
That’s 61,500 new  devices per hour, 1.5 million per day.
There are currently  about 7.4 billion devices connected to the IoT, more than  there are human beings on the planet.
By any estimation, it will be a lot more devices than are in  existence today.
However, the fact that the fi eld has  grown so quickly and so dynamically means that some of  the lessons we’ve learned in the past about security and  privacy are not being employed—in the interest of fi rst-to- market  opportunities—and  the  lack  of  oversight  has  many wondering about the unknown unknowns.
In the physical sense, the IoT is all of those billions of  devices,  installed  on  apparel,  appliances,  machines,  vehicles,  electronics—most  of  them  incorporating  sensors  to  gather  bits  of  data  and  then  sharing  that  information via the Internet through central servers.
The  concept of the IoT was introduced in 1999 and evolved  from  the  Machine-to-Machine  (M2M)  technology  that  originated  in  the  1980s,  in  which  computer  processors  communicated  with  each  other  over  networks.
The  major difference is that most of the new devices cannot  be considered processors but rather sensors and relays  that simply facilitate the aggregation of data.
Analogous  to  the  shift  to  “cloud”  computing,  it  may  be  useful  to  consider  this  new  data-generating  aspect  as  “the  fog.”   229  ¦   CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  The  two  concepts—the  IoT  and  M2M— are  now  poised  for  complete  integration,  in  what  is  termed  convergence,  as  we  move  into  technology’s  future.
Christian  Byrnes,  a  managing  vice  president  at  Gartner,  says  that  “The  Internet  of  Things  brings  a  major  addition  to  the  responsibilities of cybersecurity: safety.
IoT  includes the fi nal convergence of physical  and  security  practices.
Confi dentiality,  Integrity  and  Availability  will  be  remembered  as  ‘the good old days.’”  information    ?
With billions of connected  devices,  all  contributing  information  around  the  clock,  it’s  more  data  about  more  machines,  operations,  and  people  than  has  ever  been  collected  before— more  in  the  past  year  than  perhaps  has  been recorded in all of human history, and  certainly more than was imagined possible  just  a  few  years  ago.
The  intelligent  management and implementation of that  data  make  it  possible  to  do  such  things  as  navigate  a  driverless  car  through  city  traffi c,  monitor  a  person’s  anatomical  signals  and  take  action  to  manage  his  or  her  health,  monitor  the  movement  and  health  of  livestock,  provide  global  tracking  and  communications,  manage  energy use in buildings, and even operate  sophisticated  industrial  equipment  from  remote  locations.
Our  intelligence  and  industrial abilities in the era of the IoT will  be  limited  only  by  our  imaginations;  we  will have the data we need to accomplish  almost anything we can envision.
The early days  of  the  Information  Age  quickly  showed  us  how  important  data  gathering  could  be to the success of an operation.
The IoT   ¦  230   is,  in  that  existential  meaning,  the  latest  iteration  of  communication  technology.
Of  course,  as  soon  as  we  developed  the  ability  to  send  information  over  great  distances  in  just  seconds,  some  people  began  to  look  for  ways  to  capture  that  information  from  sources  other  than  their  own.
As  technology  has  become  ever more sophisticated in its march toward  providing  greater  capabilities  for  private  enterprise,  governments,  and  the  people  they serve, so have the tools and strategies of  the  people  who  would  access  and  use  the  information  for  more  malicious  purposes.
The lack of recognition about the seriousness  of this threat to companies and governments  leads to a lack of security suffi cient to defend  against attacks.
¦  IoT benefi ts According to John Chambers, CEO of Cisco  Systems  Inc.,  the  Internet  of  Everything  (which  includes  the  IoT  plus  the  actual  networks  that  support  and  transmit  the  data these devices generate) could be worth  $14.4  trillion  in  revenue,  plus  another  $4.6  trillion  in  savings  to  industry  and  government.
The ben- efi ts the IoT provides can be seen in every  area  that  relies  on  technology,  as  well  as  many  that  traditionally  have  not.
However,  by changing the traffi c patterns of garbage  trucks  and  installing  sensors  in  garbage  cans  to  identify  when  they  are  full  and  should be picked up, U.S. cities alone can   save  $10  billion  in  waste  management  costs.
The idea is a perfect example  of  how  the  IoT  works  at  the  micro  level.
The  buttons  are  simple  wireless  devices  with  the  logos  of  consumables  manufacturers, about the size and shape  of  a  thumb  drive.
Amazon  and  other developers are also working on IoT  devices  that  sense  when  the  supply  of  a  consumable  is  low,  and  order  the  item  automatically, without the consumer even  being aware of the act.
The infor- mation  is  often  used  in  the  commercial  realm  for  monetization  strategies,  and  by  the  government  to  target  security  threats,  each of which leads inevitably to concerns  about privacy.
In many cases when human  beings  are  the  sources  of  this  information,  they  do  not  even  know  they  are  acting  as  such.
Virtually every site a person visits on  the  Internet  in  return  gathers  information  about that person, from data stored on the  computer being used (such as location and     THE INTERNET OF THINGS     personal  information)  to  data  entered  actively  during  the  site  visit.
In  addition,  most transactions a person conducts while  out  in  the  world  have  the  potential  to  be  recorded and added to databases, and these  transactions,  when  merged  with  other  col- lected information, can be interpreted using  computer  algorithms.
In  his  book Future Crimes, Mark Goodman writes,  “Data  brokers  get  their  information  from  our  Internet  service  providers,  credit  card  issuers,  mobile  phone  companies,  banks,  credit bureaus, pharmacies, departments of  motor vehicles, grocery stores, and increas- ingly, our online activities.
All the data we  give  away  on  a  daily  basis  for  free  to  our  social networks .
Although embarrassing  for the young woman, Target’s use of the  information  gathered  was  legal  under  the  Fair  Credit  Reporting  Act,  which  allows “fi rst parties” to perform in-house  analytics on collected data.
During the Women’s Mini Marathon held  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  last  year,  Symantec  security researcher Candid Wueest stood  on  the  street  and  stealthily  monitored  data  from  the  activity  trackers  worn  by  hundreds  of  runners.
The  data  included  everything  their  names  and  addresses to the type of device they were  wearing  and  the  passwords  for  those  devices.
In  a  2013  case,  a  British  man  discovered  that  his  LG  smart  TV  was  clandestinely     231  ¦   CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  transmitting viewing information back to  the  South  Korean  manufacturer,  as  well  as reporting the contents of devices, such  as  a  USB  drive,  that  were  connected  to  the  TV.
LG  claimed  the  information  was  used,  as  in  the  Target  case,  “to  deliver  more  relevant  advertisements  and  to  offer  recommendations  to  viewers  based  on  what  other  LG  smart  TV  owners  are  watching.”  However,  the  man,  an  IT  consultant,  discovered  that  the  TV  transmitted  the  information  whether  the  system setting for “collection of watching  info” was set to on or off.
According to a report on privacy and security  released by the Federal Trade Commission in  January of 2015, one company that makes an  IoT home automation product indicated that  fewer  than  10,000  households  can  “generate  150  million  discrete  data  points  a  day,”  or  approximately  one  data  point  every  six  sec- onds for each household.
Another participant  in the report noted that “existing smartphone  sensors  can  be  used  to  infer  a  user’s  mood;  stress  levels;  personality  type;  bipolar  disor- der;  demographics  (e.g.,  gender,  marital  status, job status, age); smoking habits; over- all  well-being;  progression  of  Parkinson’s  disease;  sleep  patterns;  happiness;  levels  of  exercise;  and  types  of  physical  activity  or  movement.”  Such  “sensitive  behavior  pat- terns could be used in unauthorized ways or  by unauthorized individuals.”  ¦  IoT security issues The IoT is subject to the same security risks  as  traditional  computer  systems,  but  the  issues,  unfortunately,  don’t  stop  there.
Like  any  storage  aspect  of  the  Internet,  security  vulnerabilities  can  be  exploited  to  compro- mise sensitive information.
Rick Dakin, CEO  of  Coalfi re  in  Boulder,  Colorado,  says  that  “while headlines about cybersecurity usually  focus  on  the  changing  threat  landscape,  a  greater  concern  is  the  evolving  technology  landscape.
Most  people  rapidly  connect  unsafe  devices  to  their  networks  with  no  thought  to  security,  and  the  Internet  of  Things  will  accelerate  the  contamination  of   ¦  232   our networks.” As connectivity grows expo- nentially, so do the possibilities for security  breaches.
Any  device  in  the  IoT  that  stores  information, whether it contains Internet or  TV  viewing  preferences,  credit  card  num- bers, health information, etc., can become a  target.
The  proliferation  of  devices  that  are  part  of  the  IoT  means  that  the  number  of  access points to a system is limitless.
Don’t think that just because a device has  a  limited  function—such  as  a  smart  light- bulb, a FitBit, a smart toilet, or a thermostat— that it holds no attractiveness for hackers.
Put  enough  of  these  connected  devices  together  and  cyber  criminals  can  create  a  botnet,  a  network  of  processors  that  can  be  used  to  facilitate large, repetitive tasks, such as gen- erating passcode possibilities.
The  FTC  report  con- tains  claims  by  company  researchers  of  the  ability  to  hack  into  a  self-driving  automo- bile’s built-in telematics unit and control the  vehicle’s engine and braking.
Another claim  involves  the  ability  to  access  computerized  health equipment and change the settings so  that they are harmful to the patient.
Through  the  medical  device  hijack  attack  vector  (MEDJACK),  the  TrapX  Labs  security  team  has  identifi ed  that  in  many  cases,  medical  devices themselves are the key entry points  for  health-care  network  attacks.
Devices  as  diverse as diagnostic equipment such as CT  scanners  and  MRI  machines,  life  support  equipment  including  medical  ventilators  and  dialysis  machines,  and  even  medical  lasers and LASIK surgical machines are typi- cally  delivered  to  medical  facilities  wide  open for attacks that can compromise device  readings and operations, not to mention put- ting people’s health and lives at risk.
A  recent  Hewlett-Packard  report  noted  that 70 percent of IoT devices contain security  vulnerabilities.
Some  of  these  weaknesses  pertain to the current differences in commu- nication  standards,  as  developers  seek  to  make their devices compatible with all types  of  systems—an  aspect  of  the  convergence  factor  mentioned  earlier.
Although  many   companies  are  working  on  standardization  protocols, the issue will not go away anytime  soon.
Sensitive  commercial,  industrial,  and  government  information  is  at  risk,  and  that  risk  will  likely  grow  as  the  IoT  develops,  before  measures  suffi cient  to  mitigate  that  risk propagate.
If it’s connected to the Internet it’s hackable.
Everything  is  being  connected  to  the   Internet.
Putting  all  the  security  aspects  together,  as  some  cyber  criminals  apparently  already  have,  and  the  risks  that  accompany  the  growth  of  the  IoT  can  seem  frightening.
Hackers  have  become  so  sophisticated  in  their tactics that some are creating databases  from  the  information  gathered  in  previous  attacks,  which  can  enable  them  to  defeat  common security measures.
For example, in  the  successful  breach  of  more  than  100,000  taxpayer returns fi led electronically with the  IRS  in  2014,  the  attackers  were  able  to  cor- rectly  answer  security  questions  that  the  taxpayers  themselves  had  selected,  simply  by cross-referencing information collected in  previous  breaches  of  other  organizations’  information.
Put  a  nation-state  or  other  global  entity  behind such efforts, and the risks to sensitive  information in the IoT mount exponentially.
It’s  helpful  to  think  of  their  efforts to infi ltrate technological and security  information not so much as instigated by an  evil  intent  or  ideology,  but  as  motivated  by  the  survival  and  practical  success  of  their  entity—the concept of realpolitik updated for  the twenty-fi rst century.
They have a vested  interest in hacking information systems that  goes far beyond simple greed.
It means they  are  unfazed  by  potential  punishments  or  repercussions  and  have  the  willingness  to  commit  resources  and  effort  towards  their     THE INTERNET OF THINGS     goals because the payoffs, if they are success- ful,  are  huge—such  as  global  economic  or  even military dominance.
¦  Addressing the issues The  U.S.  Congress,  since  2012,  has  pro- posed  more  than  100  pieces  of  legislation  related  to  Internet  security  and  privacy.
Only  a  couple  were  actually  signed  into  law, but continuing security incidents, such  as the breach of Sony’s network and subse- quent hostage-taking of one of its movies,  have created greater awareness of security  issues  that  will  surely  prompt  more  attempts  at  legislation  and  regulation.
In its report, the FTC endorsed strong,  fl exible,  and  technology-neutral  general  legislation but added that IoT-specifi c leg- islation would be premature, as the fi eld is  still  in  its  early  stages  of  development.
They  would  prefer  to  see  industry  adopt  self-regulatory practices.
At  the  corporate  or  company  level,  though, there is much decision makers can  do now to address security and privacy con- cerns.
The  IoT  carries  with  it  many  risks  and  challenges;  the  companies  and  organizations  that  address  those  issues  head  on  that  will  survive.
Conventional  approaches to network security will likely  have to be rethought.
Companies and organizations should stay  up  to  date  with  evolving  vulnerability  assessments  and  advancements  in  security  solutions.
This  also  applies  to     233  ¦   CYBERSECURITY BEYOND YOUR NETWORK  administrators  and  executives,  who  should become fl uent in the language that  describes IoT capabilities, trends, and risks  so that they can make more relevant and  responsive decisions for their shareholders  and  customers.
Administrators  should  attend  conferences  and  industry  events  when possible as well.
Standardization  of  security  protocols  in  the IoT space must be made an industry- wide priority.
When breaches to networks do occur, it’s  important to notify consumers quickly so  that they can protect themselves from the  misuse of their data.
Such  breaches  should  also  prompt  industry-coordinated  action  to  address  the vulnerabilities exposed and propagate  industry standards.
Companies  can  give  themselves  some  degree of protection also by entering into  legal  agreements  with  IoT  vendors  to  provide  adequate,  tested,  and  updated   security  measures  and  to  guard  against  the  unauthorized  access  of  sensitive  information.
Remember  that  IoT  security  is  not  a  battle  that can be won and left behind.
The  future  of  the  Internet,  which carries with it the future of our world, is  ours  for  the  making.
If  you’ve  read  Isaac  Asimov,  you  know  that  he  was  visionary  about the future of technology.
In his science  fi ction composed in the 1940s, he wrote, “No  sensible decision can be made any longer with- out taking into account not only the world as it  is, but the world as it will be.” That realization  is  more  important  now  than  ever  before  because someday soon we’ll almost certainly  ask why things aren’t connected to the Internet  rather than why they are connected.
¦  234   SecurityRoundtable.org  Incident response  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  Working with law enforcement  in cyber investigations U.S. Department of Justice – CCIPS Cybersecurity Unit  The decision to call law enforcement, or to respond to a  law enforcement inquiry, during a cyber incident can be a  harrowing moment for a company’s executives and board  members.
Fear  of  losing  control  of  key  systems,  of  the  investigation’s  course,  or  over  sensitive  company  infor- mation are often given as reasons for caution or even to  forego  cooperation  altogether.
However,  working  with  law enforcement need not be fearsome.
With early plan- ning, clear communications, and an understanding of law  enforcement’s roles and responsibilities, law enforcement  and private companies can partner successfully on cyber  investigations.
¦   Law enforcement’s role in cyber investigations Law enforcement’s roles and responsibilities in a cyber  incident  vary  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  incident,  the suspected perpetrators, and the desires of the victim.
Although  every  investigation  is  different,  law  enforce- ment  agencies  working  on  cyber  investigations  are  trained  to  understand  company  concerns  and  to  incor- porate  their  needs  into  the  investigation’s  goals.
Although a primary law enforcement goal is to protect  public  safety  and  national  security,  agencies  have  evolved to do this in a way that does not cause further  harm to the victims of a cyberattack.
¦   Why work with law enforcement?
The  fi rst  question  that  may  come  to  mind  in  the  hours  after a cyber incident is why a company should work with  law  enforcement  at  all.
After  all,  it  introduces  another  source of management challenges to an already diffi cult  working  environment.
However,  working  with  law  enforcement can have signifi cant benefi ts:   ?
Investigators  can  work  with  foreign  counterparts to obtain assistance that may  be otherwise impossible.
Law  enforcement  may  be  able   to  secure  brief  delays  in  breach  reporting  requirements  so  that  they  can  pursue  active leads.
Information  shared  with  investigators  may  help  protect  other  victims,  or  even  other parts of the same organization, from  further loss and damage.
¦   Law enforcement’s priorities   and responsibilities  Law enforcement agencies, including the FBI  and  the  U.S.  Secret  Service,  prioritize  con- ducting  cyber  investigations  in  ways  that  limit disruptions to a victim company’s nor- mal  operations.
They  work  cooperatively  and discreetly with victims, and they employ  investigative measures that avoid computer  downtime  or  displacement  of  a  company’s  employees.
If they must use an investigative  measure  likely  to  inconvenience  a  victim,  they try to minimize the duration and scope  of the disruption.
Law  enforcement  agencies  also  conduct  their investigations with discretion and work  with a victim company to avoid unwarranted  disclosure  of  information.
They  attempt  to  coordinate statements to the news media con- cerning  the  incident  with  a  victim  company  to ensure that information harmful to a com- pany’s  interests  is  not  needlessly  disclosed   ¦  238   and  work  with  companies  on  timing.
Law  enforcement also has tools, including obtain- ing judicial protective orders, that can protect  sensitive information from disclosure during  investigations and prosecutions.
Sometimes,  the  best  available  course  of  action  in  a  cyber  investigation  may  not  be  pursuing  an  arrest  of  the  perpetrator  but  rather  disrupting  the  threat  in  some  other  way.
For example, law enforcement has used  combinations  of  civil  and  criminal  tools  to  disrupt  attacks  from  ‘botnets’  designed  to  steal  fi nancial  information  from  companies  and individuals.
In other cases, pursuing the  fi nancial  or  technical  infrastructure  of  a  criminal organization will be the most effec- tive strategy.
Other tools may be available to  the government that work best in a particu- lar  case.
¦   Best practices for preparing for work   with law enforcement  Preparing to work with law enforcement is  an  essential  part  of  incident  planning.
The  CCIPS  Cybersecurity  Unit  has  published  a  short  guide  entitled  Best  Practices  for  Victim  Response  and  Reporting  of  Cyber  Incidents,  which  covers  this  topic  in  greater  detail.
Some  of  the  recommended  preparations  include the following:   ?
Implement  appropriate  technology,  services,  and  authorizations.
Investigations  will  be  severely hampered if a business lacks key   information  needed  for  law  enforcement  to  develop  and  pursue  leads  early.
Ensure  that  intrusion  detection  systems  and  network  logging  tools  are  in  place,  as  well  as  the  banners  and  other  legal  authorizations necessary to use them.
Identify the information, services, or systems  that  are  most  essential  to  your  business  operations.
Knowing  and  communicating  this  information  to  law  enforcement  early in an investigation will be crucial to  prioritizing early investigative steps.
Determine  who  will  work  with   law  enforcement.
Law  enforcement  may  need  essential  information  about  your  systems  and  what  you  have  learned  about  the  attack  to  pursue  ephemeral  leads.
Designating a person or group as a  principal liaison to law enforcement will  ease this process and allow others in your  company  to  focus  on  other  immediate  priorities.
This  person  or  group  should  be  authorized  to  gather  necessary  information  and  communicate  it  to  law  enforcement agents.
Ensure  that  legal  counsel  are  familiar  with  key  legal  and  technology  issues.
Cyber  investigations  often  raise  diffi cult  legal  issues relating to privacy and monitoring.
These  counsel  can  work  with  your company’s law enforcement liaison  to ensure that information is collected and  transferred lawfully and appropriately.
Companies should establish relation- ships  with  their  local  federal  law  enforce- ment  offi ces  before  they  suffer  a  cyber  incident.
Having  a  point-of-contact  and  a  pre-existing relationship with law enforce- ment facilitates any subsequent interaction  that may occur if an organization needs to  enlist law enforcement’s assistance.
It also  helps establish the trusted relationship that     WORKING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT IN CYBER INVESTIGATIONS    cultivates  information  sharing  that  helps  victims and law enforcement.
Law enforcement agencies, including the  FBI and U.S. Secret Service, have established  regular  outreach  channels  for  companies  that  may  be  victims  of  cyberattacks.
These  include the following:   ?
FBI  Infragard  chapters  and  Cyber  Task   Forces in each of their 56 fi eld offi ces   ?
Computer  Hacking  and   Intellectual  Property  coordinators  and  National  Security  Cyber  Specialists  in  every  U.S.  Attorney’s Offi ce  Incorporating  these  resources  into  your  planning  can  pay  dividends  in  the  hours  after you discover that you may be a victim  of an attack.
Although  agencies  have  differ- ent areas of expertise, they work together to  ensure that there is ‘no wrong door’ for vic- tims.
As agencies follow leads and develop  information  about  the  likely  attacker,  they  understand and can bring together expertise  from  across  the  government  to  ensure  that  the  investigation  is  pursued  aggressively  using all appropriate tools.
A  primary  goal  in  such  contacts  is  to  ensure that additional victims get the infor- mation  necessary  to  mitigate  harms  and  secure  their  systems.
At  the  same  time,  understanding  the  victim’s  business,  the  information  that  it  processes,  and  its  rela- tionship  with  other  entities  can  help  agen- cies  better  understand  the  relationship     239  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  among  a  series  of  thefts  and  the  possible  motivations for a given cyberthreat.
Cyber  intrusions  are  rarely  isolated  to  a  single  victim,  and  law  enforcement  collects  examples  of  common  techniques  and  prac- tices  from  cyberthreats  that  can  assist  vic- tims in securing their systems.
For example,  knowing that a particular group of criminals  enters systems through a common vulnera- bility  but  once  inside  patches  the  original  vulnerability while introducing several more  can be crucial information for victims.
By the  same token, knowing that a group is focused  on a specifi c version of a common software  package or is targeting a particular industry  can  help  law  enforcement  narrow  down  a  list of possible perpetrators.
¦   Realities of cybercrime investigations Not  surprisingly,  the  realities  of  cyber  investigations  differ  from  their  portrayals  in movies and television.
Instead,  such  investigations  often  require  painstaking  assessment  of  histori- cal log fi les, a long-term understanding of  key  motivations  of  likely  attackers,  and  collection of evidence using exacting legal  processes.
To  the  extent  possible,  companies should use trusted accounts and  systems  for  communication  about  the  inci- dent and be wary of attempts to gather infor- mation  about  the  investigation  via  ‘social  engineering.’  ¦   Network forensics and tracing One  way  that  law  enforcement  conducts  investigations  is  through  network  forensics  and tracing.
Although it is occasionally pos- sible to follow a “hot lead” when an attack is  ongoing,  investigations  more  often  depend  on  a  careful  examination  of  network  logs.
Because company systems are often complex  and interrelated, investigators must consult  with  the  system  administrators  who  are  experts on critical systems to identify where  information  necessary  to  developing  leads  will be stored.
Such consultations can prove  diffi cult if all system personnel are working  intently  on  rebuilding  security  or  restoring  critical systems.
Companies can help with this by reserv- ing  a  few  experts  whose  job  it  is  to  work  with law enforcement and to identify critical  logs and other information that can be used  to identify leads for law enforcement.
These  experts will be particularly important if the  threat  is  believed  to  be  an  insider  who  has  stolen trade secrets or other sensitive infor- mation,  because  the  most  important  evi- dence is likely to be on internal systems.
¦   Working with outside counsel and private   forensic fi rms  Companies  experiencing  a  severe  cyber  incident often turn to outside legal counsel  and  private  forensic  fi rms  to  assist  them.
Having ready access to advice from lawyers  well  acquainted  with  cyber  incident  response  can  speed  decision-making  and  help  ensure  that  a  victim  organization’s  incident response activities remain on fi rm  legal footing.
An  additional  benefi t  is  that  legal  and  forensic fi rms often have established connec- tions with law enforcement agencies and are  familiar with the information that they will  likely seek and understand the cyberthreats  that  they  are  investigating.
¦   International issues Because  of  the  unbounded  nature  of  com- puter  networks  and  hence  of  cyberthreats,  cyber investigations often cross international  borders.
A prime advantage of working with  law enforcement on a cyberthreat investiga- tion is that it has the tools and capabilities to  broaden  an  investigation  to  include  foreign  partners and collect foreign evidence.
U.S. law enforcement agencies recognize  the  international  opportunities  and  chal- lenges and so have worked to build investi- gative  and  prosecution  capabilities  around  the world.
The U.S. and other countries have  entered  into  international  treaties,  most  prominently  the  Budapest  Convention  on  Cybercrime,  to  ensure  that  there  is  an  ade- quate  legal  foundation  for  investigations  into  cyberthreats.
Investigative  agencies  have  trained  cyber  agents  who  regularly  work alongside their foreign counterparts on  investigations.
Many times, direct police-to-police inter- national cooperation will be the fastest way  to get information necessary to advance an  investigation.
Although  they  are  often  slower  than  direct  assistance,  they     WORKING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT IN CYBER INVESTIGATIONS    provide  an  means for exchanging evidence.
internationally  recognized   If  a  suspect  is  identifi ed  overseas,  law  enforcement has a range of options to obtain  justice for the victim.
In  such  cases,  prosecutors  in  the  U.S.  may  work  with  their  counterparts  abroad to ensure an appropriate prosecution  in the suspect’s home country.
¦   Victim rights and expectations Victims of cyber incidents—including corpo- rate victims—have established rights under  federal  law.
Victim rights typically attach at the time that  charges are fi led, and include the following:   ?
Beyond  these  mandatory  rights,  investiga- tors and prosecutors in cyber cases strive to  ensure cooperation with and support to the  victim, to pass key information back to vic- tims  to  support  their  security  and  recovery  efforts, and to work to ensure that the victim  is  not  further  harmed  by  the  investigation  and prosecution.
Information fl ow should not  be a “one-way street” to law enforcement.
¦   Legal considerations when working closely   with law enforcement  As useful as it can be to cooperate with law  enforcement, it is also crucial that companies  understand  and  delineate  their  role  in  the  investigation  and  exercise  care  before  they  take on roles that may effectively make them  agents  of  law  enforcement.
Usually,  that  information  can  be  shared  with  law  enforcement  once  they  arrive  on  scene.
More information on  this topic can be found in Chapter 4 of the  Department  of  Justice’s  manual  Searching  and  Seizing  Computers  and  Obtaining  Electronic Evidence in Criminal Investigations,  which  is  available  from  the  Department’s  website.
In  addition,  a  sample  letter  relat- ing  to  company  monitoring  that  can  be  used  by  company  counsel  is  included  as  Appendix G of that manual.
¦   Active defense, hacking back, and potential   liabilities  Companies  undergoing  a  cyber  attack  may  be  tempted  to  “hack  back”  and  attempt  to  access or impair another system that appears  to be involved in a cyber intrusion or attack.
For  example,  reacting  to  cyberattacks  by  changing  net- work  confi gurations  or  establishing  “sand- boxes,”  in  which  companies  place  realistic  but false data to distract intruders from more  sensitive  data  are  active  steps  that  can  be  taken to help defend systems.
¦   Conclusion Effective  cybersecurity  and  cyber  investiga- tions  are  essential  to  protecting  company  assets  and  public  safety  in  our  increasingly  networked world.
¦  242   SecurityRoundtable.org  Planning, preparation, and testing for  an enterprise-wide incident response Booz Allen Hamilton – Jason Escaravage, Vice President;  Anthony Harris, Senior Associate; James Perry, Senior  Associate; and Katie Stefanich, Lead Associate  Cyber  incident  management  is  happening  at  your  organization  right  now.
Sometimes a cyber breach requires very lit- tle response; for example, it may be a benign attempt by  a curious but harmless hacker to see if your network can  be accessed.
Of course, every situation has its own nuance, but at  a  foundational  level,  every  organization,  regardless  of  size,  geographical  location,  or  industry  must  have  an  incident  management  plan.
One  that  includes  partici- pation  from  organizations  and  staff  throughout  the  enterprise.
Effective cyber incident management happens in phas- es; it is not just about a response.
To truly be  ready for any kind of cyber incident, organizations need  C-level support for smooth incident management coordi- nation.
243  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  Fill in the blank: During a major cyber breach, the fi rst thing I  do is _______ HINT: The answer is not to wait for instruction from the IT department.
They all should; they’re all  impacted by cyber incidents, so they have a role to play.
key  considerations  for  cyber  incident   management plans   ?
enabling plan adoption across the enterprise  ¦  Incident response for the C-Suite and beyond Cyber incident response is often thought of  as an IT department function.
Businesses in  their  entirety  are  connected  to  the  Internet.
As  such,  a  cyber  breach  can  happen  any- where within the business, ranging in sever- ity,  complexity,  and  impact.
Relying  on  the  IT  department  alone  to  be  ready  for  any  manifestation  of  a  cyber  incident  would  be  an unfair if not impossible expectation.
IT  security,  typically  led  by  a  chief  infor- mation  security  offi cer  (CISO),  needs  to  be  empowered by the C-Suite so they can coor- dinate cyber incident response activity among  all the impacted organizations and staff—this  requires the facilitation of good working rela- tionships  during  non-crisis  times.
One  way  to do this is for the CISO and the CEO to con- nect  on  cybersecurity  trends  frequently.
The  CISO  has  responsibility  for  assembling  the  right team, making sure the right technology  architecture  is  in  place,  and  for  reporting  cybersecurity  issues  upward.
In  a  show  of  partnership, C-level leadership should enable  the CISO to improve the organization’s inci- dent management capability.
The C-suite must understand and enforce  organization-wide  roles  in  cyber  incident  management.
In addition to collaborating with the CISO  and  truly  understanding  the  incident  man- agement  capability,  stay  on  top  of  current  cyber risks.
Not  only  that,  some  are  exclusive to certain industries.
However, one thing is certain— all parts of the business have evolving cyber  risks.
By  staying  on  top  of  cyber  risks,  you  can incorporate them as part of your enter- prise-wide risk management strategy.
It requires simple demon- stration  of  good  steady-state  behavior— which is the fi rst phase of any incident man- agement  lifecycle,  so  a  key  section  of  an  incident management plan.
¦  Putting together the cyber incident   management plan  Cyber  incident  management  is  constant;  it  happens  in  phases,  and  an  actual  incident  lifecycle is only one part of it.
Shown  in  Figure  1  is  a  full  lifecycle  for   incident management.
If you are starting from scratch, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  Cybersecurity Framework is a good reference point.
It was created in collaboration between  public sector and private industry.
¦  244     PLANNING, PREPARATION, AND TESTING FOR AN ENTERPRISE-WIDE INCIDENT RESPONSE    FIGURE  Threat Intelligence  Prepare  Prevent  Event Lifecycle Management  Detect  Respond  Remediate  C r i s i s   C o m m u n i c a  t i  o n  S t a k e h o d e r  l  C o m m u n i c a  t i  o n   &  There  is  a  caveat,  however:  incident  management  lifecycles  do  not  fi t  neatly  into  a  calendar.
When  the  steady-state  activities  are  done  well, it makes an organization resilient and bet- ter able to bounce back after a breach occurs.
¦  Elements of planning A  good  cyber  incident  management  plan  considers  the  whole  enterprise,  and  it  considers  more  than  just  the  technical  aspects  of  incident  response.
When  plan- ning  for  cyber  incident  management,  responsibilities and activities can be organ- ized  and  integrated  by  three  categories:  people, process, and technology (Table 1).
Each  of  these  things  should  be  consid- ered  in  the  context  of  your  organizational  philosophy  to  risk  management.
Policies  that  help  mitigate  risk—such  as  acceptable  use policies and data handling policies—can  be  used  as  governing  authority  for  cyber  incident management planning.
Although  an  incident  management  plan  starts with the CISO, the rest of the business  units  should  follow  suit.
Drafting  an  initial  plan  requires  substantial  effort  to  integrate   how  people,  process,  and  technology  work  together in harmony across the whole enter- prise.
And,  once  the  plan  is  created,  it  requires consistent support from the C-level  to ensure adherence by the whole organiza- tion.
Many  organizations  pay  for  expensive  tools,  documentation,  and  con- sultation but are unable to replicate any of  their  strategies  because  they  are  not  pre- pared  to  use  them.
Executives  should  understand  that  an  incident  response  pro- gram with an always vigilant, always ready  team is the greatest defense to a cyber intru- sion and will reduce risk and increase con- fi dence.
Assessing  an  organization’s   incident  response program can provide a clear vision  into their future, showing would happen if a  cyberattack occurred and delivering insight  into  what  works  and  what  does  not.
There  are  several  benefi ts  to  testing  an  organiza- tion’s incident response plan:    245  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  TABLE  People  Process  Technology   ?
Technology aids the   management plan  should include  a process and  procedure for every  phase of the incident  management lifecycle.
incident response  process—from  vulnerability intake  to understanding the  security controls on  your electronic assets  to facilitating quick  communication.
At a  basic level, there should  be automated process  for incident handling—if  your organization is still  using manual incident  tracking systems, you are  overdue for a technology  investment.
Threat and vulnerability  detection technology can  mitigate the impacts of  a cyber breach.
Beyond  basic, more sophisticated  data analytics tools  provide complex,  customized statistics  that can help measure  the business impact of  a breach, among other  capabilities.
management plan,  consider how the  incident management  team is structured  and staffed.
Consider also the   touchpoints from the  IT department into the  rest of the organization.
Make sure you know  who will provide you  with the information  you need to make  critical decisions in the  midst of an incident.
Finally, keep in mind   the partnerships  internal and external— such as vendors  and media—to the  organization that must  be built prior to an  incident that would  enable the smooth  coordination of incident  response.
Your IT department is always monitoring your network, but you’d be surprised how often  organizational cybersecurity relies on the human eye and manual processes.
Automated tool development  ?
Asset management  ?
Keeping the program relevant and at the  forefront  of  cybersecurity:  reducing  risk  and increasing executive confi dence   ?
Increasing work performance and effi ciency  to reduce cost and time spent resolving an  incident.
¦  Testing methods Testing  entails  far  more  than  just  making  sure  employees  are  trained  on  tools  and  procedures,  they  have  to  be  able  to  detect,  contain,  and  remediate  active  incidents— real  or  fi ctional—and  the  only  way  to  do  that  is  by  managing  realistic  situations.
There are a variety of ways to provide sce- narios  that  can  test  an  organization’s  inci- dent response program.
Using  a  “red  team,”  or  a  group  whose  purpose is to simulate a cyber adversary, is  a  way  to  covertly  test  the  response  to  an  actual  adversary.
Only  employees  with  a  need to know will be aware of a red team’s  activities,  so  to  the  organization’s  incident  responders,  the  scenario  is  treated  like  an  actual incident (without the loss of capital).
Although many organizations have  plenty  of  documentation  surrounding  their  program,  they  sometimes  rarely  review  or  update  it.
The  cybersecurity  landscape  changes  every  day,  which  leaves  an  under- reviewed  program  in  an  incomplete  state,  becoming  more  irrelevant  as  time  passes.
Employing specialized third parties to review  an organization’s program on a regular basis  can assist in maintaining an up-to-date, risk- averse program.
These scenarios ask participants to  use  their  current  technological  and  process  knowledge to solve situations ranging from  the exfi ltration of organizational intellectual  property  to  a  large  phishing  campaign  requesting  employee  information,  to  an  enterprise-wide  denial  of  service—halting  productivity,  sales,  or  transactions.
War  games also help an organization to craft sce- narios in which teams that do not typically  communicate  with  one  another  have  to  cooperate  to  solve  problems.
This  is  espe- cially  helpful  when  senior  leadership  is  involved—it  helps  illustrate  major  decision  points  and  clarifi es  the  business  impact  of  various cyber breach scenarios.
Although  developing,  preparing,  and  implementing the incident response plan is  essential,  making  sure  all  of  that  work  is  functional and as effi cient as possible is vital  to  having  a  successful  incident  response     247  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  program.
By implementing tests such as red  team  exercises,  war  games,  and  regular  reviews,  an  organization  can  understand  what may happen if they are an unfortunate  victim of a cyberattack and, maybe, through  solutions  implemented  through  test  fi nd- ings, prevent a real incident.
¦  Internal and external communications   planning  Once the plans have been written and tested,  it’s  important  to  keep  up  momentum  and  continued awareness about cyber risks.
Just  as the IT department is constantly engaged  in cyber incident management, so too must  the staff throughout the organization—albeit  with regard to their own personal role.
Messaging should help employ- ees  stay  attuned  to  cyberthreats  that  could  affect them, as well as how they can play a  part  in  keeping  the  organization  secure.
Keep in mind that “cyber” may not resonate  with staff outside the IT department, which   is  why  corporate  communications  can  help  craft the appropriate messaging.
In  addition  to  internal  messaging,  make  sure  cyber  incidents  are  incorporated  into  the  organization’s  crisis  communications  capability.
Just as corporate communications  would  be  on  hand  to  protect  the  brand’s  image  during  an  emergency,  they  should  similarly have a crisis communications plan  for a cyber incident.
¦  The inevitable cyber breach It’s hard to estimate the cost of a cyber inci- dent.
Having a plan that is pervasive enterprise- wide  that  uses  a  tested,  all-staff  approach  can  help  resolve  cyber  incidents  quicker.
¦  248   SecurityRoundtable.org  Detection, analysis, and  understanding of threat vectors Fidelis Cybersecurity – Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber Strategist  ¦  Rapidly evolving cyberthreat landscape Cybersecurity  and  cyberattacks  are  no  longer  emerging  issues.
Over the past three to fi ve years, the complexity of  cyberthreats has increased dramatically, and the nature of  cyberattacks has evolved from the theft of fi nancial data  and  intellectual  property  to  include  recent  destructive  attacks.
Organizations now face increasingly sophisticat- ed attacks from adversaries using multiple threat vectors  and cunning strategies to penetrate the security perimeter.
Although  the  2008  TJX  data  breach  has  long  been  assumed  to  be  the  turning  point  in  board  of  directors’  awareness of cybersecurity, it took the 2013 Target breach to  have an impact on the boards’ agenda.
Corporate directors understand that they must become  more involved in addressing cyber risks; however, cyber- security  is  a  new  and  highly  technical  area  that  leaves  many  corporate  boards  uncertain  as  to  how  to  proceed.
Although  board  members  realize  that  they need to invest in cybersecurity, such a lack of knowl- edge is affecting their ability to respond to cybersecurity  risk and provide proper oversight.
¦  Understand the adversaries Cybercrime  is  big  business,  and  sophisticated  cyber  criminals  are  playing  for  high  stakes.
However,  motiva- tions among the groups may differ:   ?
Hacktivists often seek to damage the reputation of an   organization and cause disruptions.
Organized  cyber  criminals   include  international  crime  syndicates  targeting  organizations  largely  in  the  fi nancial  services and retail industries for fi nancial  gain.
At  risk  is  anything that may be of value, including  business  plans  and  contracts;  trading  algorithms; product designs and business  processes;  trade  secrets;  client  data;  lists  of  employees,  customers,  and  suppliers;  and even employee log-on credentials.
As attackers have sharpened their skills and  expanded  their  techniques  over  the  last   couple  of  years,  organizations  are  now  fac- ing  a  new  challenge.
Cybercrime  has  advanced to include cyber warfare and cyber  terrorism as nation-state actors have moved  from disruptive to destructive attacks.
Experts  predict  that  cyberattacks  will  intensify as cyber criminals accelerate their  activities.
Organizations  face  a  world  of  continuous  compromise.
Ponemon  research,  however, shows that board members gener- ally  lack  knowledge  about  cybersecurity  breach  activity  within  their  organizations.
One in fi ve, for example, was unaware if the  organization  had  been  breached  in  the  recent past.
Although larger organizations are gener- ally able to recover from a signifi cant breach,  providing that negligence is not a factor and  excessive  liability  is  avoided,  sustaining  operations  over  the  course  of  two  or  more   Blurring lines of attack It used to be that the tactics employed by Eastern European cyber criminals were relatively  unique compared with those used by hackers deploying state-sponsored APT attacks to target  intellectual property.
In the follow- ing years, the company reportedly ignored recommendations to improve network security.
Analysts speculate that the extensive cyberattacks on the technology company ultimately  contributed to its downfall.
Clearly,  cybersecurity  has  become an increasingly challenging risk that  demands  both  corporate  management  and  board  attention.
To  provide  the  proper  risk  oversight,  the  C-level  leaders  and  board  members are advised to work closely with IT  security leaders to examine the threat envi- ronment and how adversaries are attacking  peer organizations.
¦  Understand the threat vectors The fast pace of cloud, mobile, virtualization,  and emerging technologies present opportu- nities to gain operational effi ciencies, deploy  innovative business models, and create new  markets.
In  today’s  digital  world,  employees  are  increasingly  interconnected  and  leverage  a  variety  of  mobile  devices,  applications, and cloud platforms to conduct  business in the offi ce, at home, and “on-the- go.”  Mobile  applications,  email,  WiFi  net- works, and social media sites are just some of  the  vulnerable  access  points  that  attackers  seek to exploit.
Not only are employees increasingly inter- connected,  but  organizations  are  as  well.
Boards  and  corporate  management  must  consider the extended attack surface and the  potential security risks associated with third  parties such as suppliers, transaction proces- sors, affi liates, and even customers.
Not to be  overlooked  are  law  fi rm  partners,  as  they  hold data relating to an organization’s confi - dential operations and trade secrets.
Internal employees present at least as big  an  exposure  for  companies  as  do  external  attacks.
There is increasing recognition that  the  activity  of  employees  with  privileged  access  and  administrative  rights  must  be  monitored,  controlled,  and  audited.
Part  of  the  concern  is  not  necessarily  that  the  employees  go  rogue  and  become  insider  threats, which certainly has to be considered,  but that hackers target the credentials of sys- tem administrators because they grant unfet- tered system access.
To guard against the use  of  compromised  credentials,  organizations  should implement the concept of least privi- lege  for  employee  digital  rights,  especially  for those with administrative rights.
Threat  vectors  used  to  compromise  an  organization  can  include  network  intrusions,  compromised  websites  and  web  applications,  malware,  targeted  “spear  phishing”  and  other  email  attacks,  Trojans,  zero-day  exploits,  social  engineering  tactics,  and  privilege  misuse.
¦  Detect advanced threats Like  any  business  risk,  cybersecurity  risk  must  be  calculated  and  then  mitigated  through the use of specifi c types of controls,  such  as  fi rewall,  antivirus,  intrusion  detec- tion,  and  other  similar  solutions.
However,  no  network  is  so  secure  that  hackers  won’t   Questions to ask about risk  ?
Do we consider external and internal threats when planning cybersecurity programs?
Do our vendor partners have adequate security measures?
Do we have suffi cient   contractual clauses regarding such security?
What are best practices for cybersecurity?
Where do our practices differ?
Unfortunately,  organizations  are  hard  pressed to match resources with cyber crimi- nals.
Similar  to  a  game  of  “whack-a-mole,”  once organizations get on top of one type of  attack,  the  cyber  criminals  simply  evolve  their tactics.
A  solid  cybersecurity  governance  pro- gram is vital to getting ahead of cybercrime.
Unfortunately, there is a gap in the percep- tion  of  governance  effectiveness  between  board members and security professionals.
Ponemon research indicates that 59 per- cent of board members believe the corpora- tions’  cybersecurity  governance  practices  are very effective, whereas only 18 percent  of  security  professionals  believe  so.
This  gap in perspective has to be closed if organ- izations are to improve their ability to face  increasingly  stealthy  and  sophisticated  cyber risks.
¦  Robust, constant monitoring is key to detection The saying, “You don’t know what you don’t  know”  is  especially  true  in  cybersecurity.
Robust, constant network monitoring is vital  to  uncovering  threats.
Any  number  of  solu- tions  are  available  that  enable  organizations  to monitor network activity.
Because the vol- ume  of  network  traffi c  combined  with  increasingly complex networks defi es manual  threat analysis, many organizations often rely   on  the  automated  threat-detection  capabili- ties  of  numerous  disparate  solutions.
However,  this  overreliance  on  technology  alone  to  address  security  threats  can  cause  organizations to lose sight of the bigger threat  picture.
Organizations also jeopardize their ability  to  detect  advanced  threats  through  a  failure  to  fully  integrate  the  security  solutions  into  the  entire  network  defense  infrastructure.
Often  security  technologies  are  deployed  with default settings, resulting in many false- positive  alerts.
Many  times  organizations  overlook  the  human  element.
Organizations  can’t depend on technology alone to defend  networks.
Detecting  advanced  threats  requires  a  risk  management  program  that  includes  technology,  people,  and  processes.
Board  members  should  ensure  that  security  budgets include funding for security experts  who  can  understand  the  risk,  interpret  the  alerts, and act on the intelligence.
¦  Anticipate attacks Today’s threat actors conduct detailed recon- naissance  and  develop  custom  malware  in  an effort to penetrate networks.
A  dynamic threat intelligence capability helps  to  ensure  that  organizations  can  anticipate  breaches  before  they  occur  and  adjust  their  defensive strategies.
Widespread  sharing  of  threat  intelli- gence  among  security  professionals  can  empower  organizations  to  detect  threats  more  effi ciently  and  effectively  and  avoid   Dismissed security alerts lead to massive breach A large retailer became the victim of a major data breach.
The retailer had invested hundreds  of millions of dollars in data security, had a robust monitoring system in place, and had been  certifi ed as PCI compliant.
A small amount of hacker activity was surfaced to the security team, evaluated, and acted on;  however, the team determined it didn’t warrant further investigation.
¦  252     DETECTION, ANALYSIS, AND UNDERSTANDING OF THREAT VECTORS    cyber attacks.
Integrated from several sources  and  typically  shared  through  an  automat- ed, continuous, real-time threat intelligence  data  stream,  IOCs  provide  information  on  malicious  code  and  malicious  web  pages  that hackers are using.
At the other end of the threat intelligence  spectrum  are  threat  advisories,  which  pro- vide big picture analysis of current security  issues posing risks to enterprises.
¦  Build board cyber literacy As boards become more involved in cyberse- curity,  they  should  address  cybersecurity  risk  as  they  would  other  types  of  business  risk.
To be effective in leading their organiza- tions  with  the  right  knowledge,  oversight,  and  actions,  boards  need  a  base  level  of  understanding  of  cybersecurity  risks  facing  the  organization.
However,  organizations  are challenged with what is the best way to  build this board cyber literacy.
Many boards already have some form of  oversight when it comes to cyber exposure,  generally  in  the  audit  committee  or  risk  committees  specifi cally  tasked  with  enter- prise  IT  security  and  emerging  risks.
To  gain a deeper understanding of the relevant  issues surrounding cyber risk, some organi- zations are adding cyber expertise directly  to  the  board  via  the  recruitment  of  new  directors.
In  addition  to  board  composition,  direc- tors point to a lack of available time on the  agenda  to  discuss  cybersecurity  as  a  road- block  in  becoming  cyber  literate.
Although  board members are not expected to be cyber- security  experts,  they  need  access  to  exper- tise  to  help  inform  boardroom  discussions.
Ways  to  bring  knowledgeable  perspectives   on cybersecurity matters into the boardroom  include the following:   ?
“Deep  dive”  briefi ngs  from  third-party  experts,  including  cybersecurity  fi rms,  government  agencies,  and  industry  associations   ?
Guidance  from  the  board’s  existing  external  auditors  and  outside  counsel,  who will have a multi-client and industry- wide  perspective  on  cyber  risk  trends  and how the organizations’ cyber defense  program  compares  with  others  in  the  industry   ?
Periodic exercise of the incident response   plan to include board members.
¦  Empower the chief information security   offi cer  Boards  have  a  responsibility  to  manage  cyber  risks  as  thoroughly  as  possible.
One  critical  element  in  providing  effective  over- sight  is  to  empower  the  chief  information  security  offi cer  (CISO)  to  drive  security  throughout the organization.
In many organ- izations  the  CISO’s  role  is  subordinate  to  that  of  the  chief  information  offi cer  (CIO).
Whereas the CISO is focused on  data and network security, the CIO is focused  on  supporting  business  processes  with  applications  and  networks  that  have  high  availability.
Recognizing that business strategies that  lack a security component increase vulner- abilities and place the organization at risk,  the CISO must have a strong, independent  voice  within  the  organization.
To  accom- plish  this,  the  board  must  ensure  that  the  CISO is reporting at the appropriate levels  within the organization.
Although there is  no single right answer, the trend has been  to migrate reporting lines to other offi cers,  including  the  general  counsel,  the  chief  operating  offi cer,  the  chief  risk  offi cer,  or     253  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  Questions to ask about cyber literacy and CISO empowerment  ?
Are we considering cybersecurity aspects of our major business decisions, such as   mergers and acquisitions, partnerships, and new product launches?
Are we allocating enough time for cybersecurity on the board agenda?
Are we continuously monitoring and regularly reporting on governance compliance,   maturity level, progress of information security, and data privacy projects and  activities, as well as the status of incidents, risks, and issues within the organization?
Do we have clear lines of accountability and responsibility for cybersecurity?
Is the information security management function organizationally positioned at the   appropriate level to effectively implement policies?
Is the cybersecurity budget adequate?
even the chief executive offi cer, depending  on the industry, size, and scope of the com- pany,  and  the  organization’s  dependency  on technology.
¦  Conclusion The  threat  landscape  is  rapidly  evolving  as  well-funded  cyber  criminals  continue  to  launch  increasingly  sophisticated  attacks  through multiple threat vectors.
Cybersecurity  will continue to pose a serious risk that will  demand  corporate  management  and  board  attention  and  oversight.
Boards  that  fail  to  actively  measure  and  continuously  monitor   cybersecurity  as  part  of  the  organization’s  strategy will leave their fi rms open to signifi - cant  fi nancial,  reputational,  and  competitive  risk.
The overwhelming number of cyber inci- dents has forced board members to become  more involved in cybersecurity, which is as it  should  be.
Board  members  don’t  need  to  be  cyber  experts,  but  they  should  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  risks  their  organization  faces  and  provide  the support needed to the IT security profes- sionals to protect against those risks.
¦  254   SecurityRoundtable.org  Forensic remediation Fidelis Cybersecurity – Jim Jaeger, Chief Cyber  Strategist and Ryan Vela, Regional Director,  Northeastern North America Cybersecurity Services  When  a  data  breach  occurs,  directors  and  C-level  execu- tives must be ready with an incident response and reme- diation plan to minimize the damage, limit the company’s  liability and exposure, and help the company resume nor- mal  operations  as  quickly  as  possible.
Although  some  organizations  are  well  prepared,  sometimes  even  compa- nies  that  have  invested  millions  of  dollars  on  preventive  and detection systems fall short in responding to and reme- diating data breaches.
Frequently, it’s because the organiza- tion hasn’t fully developed the relationships and processes  necessary for rapid and coordinated response.
Beyond  digital  forensic  preservation,  investigation, and containment, the complexities of breach  remediation require notifi cation of a broad range of third  parties and engagement with law enforcement.
By engag- ing  breach  resolution  experts  that  provide  forensics  services,  litigation  support,  and  crisis  communications,  organizations can more effectively combat today’s sophis- ticated cyberthreats.
¦  Assemble a cross-functional response team Effective investigation and remediation of a data breach  requires  an  understanding  of  the  cyber  adversary  and  specialized forensic skills that most IT staffs lack.
When a  company  that  does  not  have  its  own  internal  security  team experiences a cyberattack, it is vital that the fi rm hire  experts who are experienced in digital forensics, incident   255  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  response,  and  remediation.
provides  the  technological  expertise  and  industry  knowledge  to  fully  remediate  the incident   ?
enables the organization to maintain and  secure  attorney-client  privilege  for  the  reports and other investigative documents.
Breach response also requires that an organi- zation  have  a  well-prepared  internal  inci- dent response team.
Companies that suffer a  breach  without  having  established  such  a  team often waste valuable time trying to get  organized  and  assign  responsibilities,  stall- ing  the  breach  remediation  process.
The  team should include representatives from IT,  security, legal, compliance, communications,  risk  management,  and  affected  business  units.
¦  Engage outside legal counsel The legal ramifi cations of a data breach can  be devastating, ranging from litigation and  regulatory  investigations  to  civil  liabilities  effects  that  may  include  shareholder  and  customer-driven  lawsuits.
Because  inside  counsel  lacks  the  specialized  cyber  exper- tise  that  is  needed  for  effective  breach  response,  it’s  vital  that  an  organization  identify, vet, and retain outside counsel that  has  the  ability  to  respond  on  a  moment’s  notice.
The  benefi ts  of  outside  counsel  include the following:   ?
specialized   skillsets:   cyberattack  investigations  require  a  team  of  lawyers  with  regulatory,  data-breach  response,  privacy,  litigation,  and  eDiscovery  expertise;  outside  counsel  brings  the   ¦  256   specialized  skills  and  credentials  that  internal teams lack   ?
attorney-client  privilege:   engaging  outside  counsel  secures  the  privilege  needed to protect internal communications  from  discovery  by  any  opposing  party  during  pretrial  investigation  and  from  being  used  as  evidence  in  a  trial;  also,  invoked  privilege  allows  the  forensic  company to report breach results directly  to the law fi rm   ?
leadership  advice:  leadership  of  any  organization falling victim to a data breach  instinctively seeks to minimize costs and  take  shortcuts  in  incident  response;  by  quarterbacking  the  investigation  and  remediation, outside counsel often proves  invaluable  in  providing  a  strategy  and  helping  C-level  leadership  and  directors  to hold themselves to the course of action.
¦  Control breach communications Ultimately,  all  communications  about  the  breach have the potential to leave an organi- zation open to legal liability.
This  includes  facilitating  conversations between members of the inci- dent response team and organizing external  communications.
Internally, getting the right information to  the right people at the right time can make or  break breach incident response efforts.
When  members of the response team are working  with incomplete, inaccurate, or different sets  of  information,  it  can  lead  to  costly  ineffi - ciencies,  delays,  and  errors  in  breach  response.
It is also vital that organizations engage a  crisis  communications  fi rm  to  handle  all  external  communications.
The organization was maintaining a database of 90,000 donors when it noticed indications  of hacker activity in the network.
By synching the communication cycle with the progress of the investigation, the organization  was able to avoid falsely alerting 90,000 donors that their data was at risk.
Just as important, there is nothing worse  than having to publically recant information.
In  deciding  whether  to  release  a  statement,  organizations should consider the following:   ?
Is  there  accurate  information  to  report?
Waiting  until  a  report  from  an  external  forensic  response  fi rm  has  been  reviewed  can  help  organizations  maintain  accurate  communications.
Is disclosure within a specifi c timeframe  required?
Timing  of  disclosures  often  is  dictated  by  statutory  and  regulatory  requirements.
Several  state  breach  laws,  for  example,  require  notifi cation  upon  discovery  or  without  reasonable  delay.
Involving law enforcement is also prudent  in that cyber criminals routinely hide behind  borders, and bringing them to justice remains  a challenge.
The U.S. government is increas- ingly  partnering  with  foreign  governments  and  international  law  enforcement  agencies  in efforts to prosecute malware creators and     257  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  Collaboration with law enforcement takes down hacking ring Monday mornings can hit hard for many people, but for a major payments processor, one  particular Monday morning packed a punch.
In a brazen move, a global network of thieves  had breached the processor’s network.
By acting on information provided by the FBI, the forensic team was able to uncover ad- ditional details about the breach and advance the investigation to the point of identifying  the culprits.
Through cooperation from various law enforcement agencies worldwide, the  investigation broke the sophisticated computer hacking ring and, for the fi rst time, resulted  in a Russian court convicting hackers for cybercrimes committed in the United States via  the Internet.
If there  is  any  indication  that  the  investigation  may  have  an  international  aspect,  federal  law  enforcement  may  be  able  to  expedite  the  investigation.
Also,  in  some  cases,  organizations  may  be  able  to  delay  notifi cation  requirements  if  it  would impede or interfere with a law enforce- ment investigation.
¦  Alert industry regulators Threat actors are neither attacking one insti- tution at a time, nor are they quickly chang- ing their methods.
With  the  increasing  number  of  data breaches comes a renewed push for the  sharing  of  cyber  risk  information  between  the  United  States  government  and  the  pri- vate sector to help individual organizations  and  industries  as  a  whole  better  defend  against attacks.
Because of their position in  the industry, regulators can be an important  source  of  information  on  cyber  threats,  attacks, and trends.
Information sharing and  analysis  organizations  have  made  a  resur- gence and organizations can benefi t by seek- ing  their  aid  for  insight  on  indicators  of  compromise during a data breach.
Because  regulators  will  have  to  be  satisfi ed that the data breach has been com- pletely  resolved,  organizations  should  engage  with  regulators  as  early  as  possible  during the remediation process.
¦  Notify insurance providers After a data breach, organizations can expect  to see signifi cant costs arising from forensic  investigations,  outside  counsel,  crisis  com- munications professionals, data breach noti- fi cation  expenses,  regulatory  investigations  and fi nes, lawsuits, and remedial measures.
Once  an  incident  is  determined  to  be  a  breach,  it’s  important  to  engage  with  the  fi rm’s  insurance  providers  to  evaluate  the  insurance  coverage  and  determine  which  existing  policies  may  cover  the  event;  as  well  as  identify  the  necessary  reporting  requirements.
One of the challenges with cyber insur- ance is the lack of standardization in terms  of coverage.
Here,  the  outside  forensics  response  team   can also be invaluable in helping organiza- tions  to  articulate  and  justify  cyber  insur- ance claims.
¦  Conduct complete, focused digital forensics   analysis  When  a  data  breach  occurs,  organizations  need answers fast: Who was involved?
Further,  the proper preservation of digital evidence is  crucial to demonstrate to regulators that rea- sonable  security  controls  are  in  place  or  to  prove  wrongdoing  in  criminal  prosecution.
However,  organizations  all  too  often  are  thrown into panic.
In  the  course  of  its  forensics  efforts,  organizations  typically  encounter  two  challenges:   ?
Many  times  organizations  fail  to  look  beneath  the  surface in the hopes that a simple review  will  fi x  the  problem.
By  exploring  all  potentially  compromised  systems,  organizations  can  reduce  the  risk  of  overlooking exposed system components.
internal  IT  staff  may  A  company’s  compromise  the  evidence  even  before  forensic  experts  it.
Organizations  must  ensure  that  the  internal  IT  staff  is  mindful  of  proper  evidence-handling protocol.
Improper  handling  of   can  preserve   ¦  Focus on aggressive remediation When  an  organization  experiences  a  data  breach,  it  is  often  diffi cult  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  attack  cycle  and  pathways  of     FORENSIC REMEDIATION     attack  as  hackers  disperse  their  tools  throughout  the  network.
Here,  incident  responders  work  to  eliminate  malware  as  soon  as  it  is  discovered.
However, the  drawback is that the organization forfeits the  opportunity  to  learn  about  the  hacker’s  tactics and runs the risk of retaliation.
Also,  attackers may go quiet, making it more dif- fi cult  to  fi nd  their  tools  and  requiring  that  forensic  investigators  shift  their  efforts  to  eradication.
At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  is  aggressive remediation, in which all reme- diation actions are executed simultaneously  across the entire network.
This approach is called  for  when  an  organization  experiences  repeated  breaches  by  the  same  advanced  attackers  or  a  breach  has  gone  undetected  for  weeks  or  months.
Because this method fully removes all  traces  of  the  attacker’s  tools,  threats,  and  vulnerabilities,  including  the  attacker’s  ability to re-enter the network, it minimizes  retaliatory risk.
This  approach  allows  the  attacker  to  remain active in the network during investi- gation.
Special  forensic  skills,  extensive  planning,  and  sophisticated  exe- cution therefore are required to avoid inter- fering with or alerting the attacker as to the  forensic  efforts  underway,  as  well  as  to  minimize  the  potential  for  damage  and  data loss.
The ruse worked, allowing the team to keep the attacker alive in the  network long enough to complete the forensic analysis and eradication.
¦  The critical importance of network monitoring If determined attackers want to get in, they  will fi nd a way.
The real question is whether  the  organization  will  detect  the  breach.
Unfortunately,  the  answer  is,  “Probably  not.”  Advanced,  targeted  attacks  focus  on  quiet reconnaissance and infi ltration of their  victims’  network.
Professional  cyber  crimi- nals are so adept at cloaking their activities  that they routinely go unnoticed for months,  even years, without detection.
Although defense-in-depth has long been  hailed  as  a  best  practice,  organizations  are  now urged to improve their abilities to detect  attacks that have succeeded.
Robust network  monitoring  is  a  strategically  important  ele- ment  in  IT  security  and  is  crucial  to  deter- mining if anything was stolen.
By employing  robust  network  monitoring  organizations  can maintain control, limit the damage, and  plan for an appropriate response.
¦  Summary Organizations  have  reached  a  pivot  point,  realizing that it is no longer a question of if  the  fi rm has  been hacked, but  an assump- tion that it has.
Faced with the new reality  of operating the business while potentially   executing incident response activities, organ- izations  are  placing  a  priority  on  robust  network monitoring to detect the extraordi- narily  complicated  threats  hidden  in  the  network.
Once  identifi ed,  these  threats  demand a host of remediation responses that  include  forensic  preservation,  containment,  expulsion, and remediation.
Responding to a  major  breach  correctly  requires  a  team  of  outside forensic and legal experts partnered  with their internal incident response team.
A  well-defi ned incident response team includes  key staff functions and line of business man- agers as well as C-level executives and cor- porate directors.
Getting the right people involved and under- standing the best way to effi ciently use them  is  essential  to  properly  investigating  and  remediating the event while managing costs  and extent of business impact.
Board direc- tors and C-level leadership must ensure that  their  organizations  are  ready  with  a  well  thought out breach incident response plan to  help  minimize  the  organization’s  liability  and exposure.
¦  260   SecurityRoundtable.org  Lessons learned—containment  and eradication Rackspace Inc. – Brian Kelly, Chief Security Offi cer  Cyberattacks continue to proliferate and show no signs of  stopping.
Information  security  is  a  business  risk  issue,  and  concerns  over  how  to  manage  data  breaches  have  moved  beyond  IT  security  teams  to  the  C-suite  and  the  board.
Recognizing  that  attacks  happen  to  the  best  of  organizations,  board  directors  are  asking,  “What  can  be  done to minimize the damage?” Based on the experience  of senior information security leadership servicing some  of the largest data breaches to date, here are ten lessons  that offer guidance in successfully containing and eradi- cating cyberattacks.
¦   Cast incident response in the context of business risk Although the natural tendency has been to treat cyberat- tacks  as  a  technical  issue  to  be  resolved  by  the  security  team, such attacks are serious business problems that can  pose substantial risk to the business.
Decisions made uni- laterally by the security team without an appreciation for  strategic  initiatives  can  have  signifi cant  implications  for  the corporation.
However,  not  every  incident  requires  the  same  command  and  control  structure.
Careful  planning  should  deter- mine  in  advance  the  level  of  management  required  based  on  the  severity  of  the  event  and identify those that require board atten- tion and corporate offi cer leadership.
The inci- dent  response  leader  takes  control  and  leads the team through the steps necessary  to respond to the incident.
Effective  command  and  control  during  these  times  of  crisis  is  critical.
Because  time  is  critical,  nothing  can  be  worse  than  senior  executives  trying  to  infl uence  activity  or  wrestle  control  when  an attack is in progress.
Slow response and  uncoordinated  containment  activities  can  provide  attackers  with  the  time  necessary  to  move  laterally  in  the  network,  creating  an even more serious breach.
It is therefore  vital  that  command  and  control  be  clear,  understood, disciplined, and followed with  precision.
To  increase  leadership’s  understanding  of  the  workings  of  command  and  control  and provide insight into the protocols and  procedures of incident response, it is imper- ative  that  organizations  rehearse  the  inci- dent  response  plan  at  least  annually.
how  to  protect  the  incident  response  information fl ow that is for the response  team’s exclusive use   ?
Armed with such information, leadership  and board directors are better enabled to for- mulate questions and act on the information  to provide proper governance and oversight.
¦   Retain incident response teams and   outside counsel experienced in managing  cybersecurity incidents  When it comes to containment and eradica- tion,  it  is  vital  that  internal  security  teams  understand their strengths and weaknesses.
Often internal teams assume they can handle  the event and try to fi x the problems them- selves, only to make matters worse by acci- dentally  destroying  or  tainting  crucial  evi- dence.
Organizations  are  therefore  turning  to  external  counsel  and  forensic  response  teams that can step in on a moment’s notice  to respond to cyberattacks.
Because  different  phases  of  the  incident  response lifecycle require different capabili- ties,  such  as  evidence  collection,  forensic  analysis,  and  malware  reverse  engineering,  organizations should select teams that have  broad  expertise.
Established  relationships  with several teams is wise because the scope  and  magnitude  of  an  incident  may  require     LESSONS LEARNED—CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION    more than one forensics team.
Selecting  and  vetting  cyber  response teams in advance allows the team  an  opportunity  to  learn  about  the  fi rm’s  operational practices and environment.
Organizations also should look to engage a  trusted  advisor  to  provide  independent  advice to directors and offi cers regarding the  security  incident.
Faced  with  pressure  to  defl ect accusations or make things look better  during  an  event,  internal  staff  may  report  only what is necessary or skew information.
An  impartial  trusted  advisor  knows  how  to   interact  with  internal  personnel,  query  the  forensic  investigators,  analyze  the  fi ndings,  and  provide  the  perspective  that  the  board  and  senior  management  need  for  decision  making.
¦   Employ good case management practices No one ever fully knows how an investiga- tion will evolve.
Even if it is unlikely that a  security event will become public or that the  investigation  will  end  up  in  a  court  of  law,  directors  should  assume  that  it  could  and  take the appropriate actions from day one.
It  is  vital  to  follow  good  case  management  practices and do everything possible to pre- serve forensics evidence—from the fi rst indi- cation  of  the  event  through  to  the  comple- tion of the investigation.
Organizations  that  are  slow  to  engage  the  appropriate forensics partners run the risk of  potentially  destroying,  tainting,  or  missing  key  evidence  that  could  be  crucial  in  the  later  stages  of  the  investigation.
An inexperienced team, or one lacking the proper evidence collection, forensic  analysis, and incident response skills, may not only cost an organization in terms of time and  money but also jeopardize the success of mitigating the attack by inadvertently destroying or  tainting evidence.
is unable to put a big picture together that includes the scope of the breach as well as   the sequence and path of movement   ?
263  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  this  investigation  to  present  a  solid  case?”  organizations  can  limit  their  liability  down  the road and better position themselves for  successful litigation.
¦   Adopt an outcome-based approach Some forensics organizations take a checklist  approach to incident response.
However, no  two cyber events are the same, and incident  response  is  not  a  scripted  process.
Security  teams  operate  under  the  fog  of  cyberwar,  and decisions will be made under conditions  of stress, fatigue, and confusion in response  to seemingly random events.
During  the  course  of  containment  and  eradication, it is expected that attackers will  take new action based on the security team’s  efforts.
This  model  provides  a  method for making informed decisions and  acting  based  on  feedback  from  various  sources.
Recognizing that attackers are doing  the same, the key is to tighten and accelerate  the OODA Loop, leveraging people, process,  and  technology  to  move  faster  than  the  adversaries.
During  a  cyber crisis, a company may need to notify   ¦  264   customers, answer to the press, respond to  regulators, and defend the company’s con- duct in parallel actions, such as a civil suit  and a regulatory investigation.
A  company’s  internal  public  relations  team  knows  much  about  the  organization  but is not an expert in directing cyber breach  communications.
When  multi-billion  dollar  payments  and  corporate  reputations  are  at  risk, board directors and senior management  must  take  care  to  turn  to  independent,  impartial crisis communications experts.
Independent experts provide the clear  thinking  and  unbiased  perspective  that  is  required  to  assist  the  company  in  all  dia- logues  and  announcements—from  initial  notifi cation  to  worst-case  communications.
Often  overlooked  is  the  need  to  manage  negative  nonverbal  communica- tions that may be sent to internal and exter- nal parties as a result of actions taken by the  response team.
For example, shutting down  a  website  or  requiring  password  changes  sends  a  clear  message  that  something  has  happened.
The  communications  team  must  manage  these  types  of  communications  as  well.
During  the containment effort, organizations should  be prepared to shut down or block services,  revoke  privileges,  increase  controls,  and  place  restrictions  on  network  connectivity   and Internet access.
Such activities can affect  business processes dramatically by restrict- ing  organizational  functions  and  work  fl ows;  therefore,  the  decision  to  perform  such  actions  should  never  be  one  sided.
Because business activities are dynamic, the  decision to implement controls during con- tainment always should include a two-way  discussion  with  business  process  owners  and  company  leadership.
It  is  vital  that  organizations  have  strategies  and  proce- dures  in  place  for  making  containment- related  decisions  that  refl ect  the  level  of  acceptable risk to the organization.
¦   Focus on people, process, and technology   during eradication  Malware detection and eradication can be an  expensive  and  time-consuming  process,  as  malware  can  lie  dormant  in  a  system  for  months and then activate again.
Here, the natural tendency is to lead  with a technology solution.
The  reality  is  that,  without  taking     LESSONS LEARNED—CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION    Organizations  must   people  and  processes  into  consideration,  technology  actually  can  create  more  com- plexity,  consume  more  resources  than  it  returns, and deliver only incremental value.
In short, complexity is the enemy of security.
take  a  holistic  approach  to  eradicating  and  closing  the  security  gaps.
This  may  necessitate  new  processes  and  policies,  new  services  and  technologies,  and  additional  personnel.
Skimping  on  cybersecurity  may  result  in  much  higher  costs  down  the  line.
Board  directors  should  be  prepared  to  increase  security budgets and can be fi rm but fair in  maintaining their fi duciary responsibility by  requiring  the  right  justifi cation  from  the  security team.
¦   Share information with others   who can benefi t  The fact that hackers have breached the com- puter  systems  is  the  kind  of  news  that  no  organization  wants  to  reveal.
However, for the good of the  industry, the sharing of incident details may   Attacker gains the upper hand—once When the cyberattack happened, it caught everyone by surprise, but it shouldn’t have.
It  was just a matter of time, because the organization had a high level of technology debt, the  IT security lacked alignment with the business, the business unit failed to understand its  level of risk and necessary controls, and the organization had given minimal attention to  rehearsing incident response.
It took the organization more than 48 hours to detect the breach.
Then, several days   passed before they realized the event was bigger than what could be handled internally.
The  delay in detection and slow action to call in security experts allowed the attackers to move  quickly through the network, expand their footprint, and ultimately affect more than twenty  customer environments.
This time the organization  was prepared.
The technology debt had been paid, resulting in a stronger foundation and  improved security monitoring.
IT security was well aligned with the business, and the busi- ness unit understood and accepted its risk and controls.
More important, the organization  had rehearsed incident response scenarios.
The internal response team was able to shut the attack down in a matter of minutes with  little cost and no risk to the business or customers.
Cyberattacks  are the new normal and security breaches no  longer carry the stigma that they once did.
What  is  important  to  recognize  is  that  cyber  criminals  use  the  same  attacks  over  and over again.
By using the same code with  slight modifi cations, cyber criminals achieve  effi ciency in their efforts while driving their  costs down.
By sharing information with oth- ers who can benefi t, such as other companies  within the industry sector, the U.S. Computer  Emergency  Response  Team,  and  cybersecu- rity  researchers  who  may  be  able  to  assist,  organizations  can  help  protect  others  while  driving up the adversary’s costs.
Because  the  han- dling of cyberattacks can be extremely expen- sive,  organizations  may  fi nd  it  helpful  to  conduct a robust, non–fi nger-pointing assess- ment of lessons learned after major cyberat- tacks to prevent similar incidents from hap- pening  in  the  future.
Capturing  the  lessons  learned from the handling of such incidents  should help an organization improve its inci- dent  handling  capability.
Questions  to  ask  include the following:   ?
Did we manage the command and control   effectively?
¦   Summary No  matter  what  precautions  are  taken,  no  organization  is  immune  to  cyberattacks.
Organizations must have a comprehensive  incident response team that includes exter- nal incident response and forensic analysis,  outside and in-house counsels, and public  relations fi rms in place prior to any breach  event.
These  partners  provide  incident  response forensics, legal and crisis commu- nications  assistance;  and  will  manage  the  incident  in  conjunction  with  the  organiza- tion to mitigate the damage and return the  business  to  full  operational  capacity  as  quickly  as  possible.
Tabletop or  similar exercises that include C-level man- agement  and  board  directors  should  be  carried  out  to  help  organizations  practice  incident  responses  and  stress-test  their  plans.
¦  266   SecurityRoundtable.org  Cyber incident response BakerHostetler – Theodore J. Kobus, Partner and  Co-Leader, Privacy and Data Protection; Craig A. Hoffman,  Partner; and F. Paul Pittman, Associate  Most security experts acknowledge that a dedicated and  well-resourced  attacker  will  eventually  fi nd  a  way  to  break into a company’s network.
Faced with an ever- increasing  number  of  endpoints  to  guard,  online  access  management  issues  related  to  cloud  services  and  ven- dors, budgetary constraints, and the fact that systems are  built  and  maintained  by  individuals  (who  are  fallible),  companies  are  recognizing  at  an  increasing  rate  that  a  security incident involving the unauthorized access to its  customer, employee, or sensitive business data is inevita- ble.
By taking a series of  measures  to  become  ‘compromise  ready,’  including  developing  an  incident  response  plan.
In  this  chapter  we  discuss  the  underlying  state  and  federal  notifi cation  obligations  that  are  implicated  by   267  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  potential incidents along with best practices  developed  from  our  experience  in  helping  companies  respond  to  more  than  1,000  potential events.
¦   Incident response best practices A  company’s  incident  response  should  be  guided by a plan that has been tailored to the  company’s industry and fi ne-tuned through  mock breach exercises.
The response plan is  a  critical  element  of  the  crisis  management  strategy—not because it provides a prescrip- tive, detailed list of action items, but because  it  has  been  refi ned  and  practiced  through  tabletop drills.
A good plan outlines a fl exi- ble framework of the general steps that must  be  taken  to  prepare  for,  respond  to,  and  recover from a security incident.
An incident  response  plan  must  be  fl exible  enough  to  adapt to the particular security incident the  company  is  facing  (e.g.,  network  intrusion,  denial  of  service,  account  takeovers,  mal- ware,  phishing,  loss  of  paper,  employee  data,  security  vulnerabilities  detected  by  third parties, or theft of assets).
Identify  the   internal   Identify   team  members   incident  response  team.
from  critical  departments  (e.g.,  IT,  IS,  legal,  communications, internal audit, HR, risk  management,  business  lines),  describe  their  roles,  and  defi ne  how  and  when  they  will  be  activated  when  a  potential  incident is identifi ed.
For some, the IT and IS groups play  a  signifi cant  role.
Because  some  issues  go  beyond  the  technical  response, being a good project manager is  probably one of the key traits a company  should look for when deciding who will  lead  the  group.
Practice  drills  also  help   ¦  268   to ensure that the various team members  understand  their  role  and  authority  to  make decisions.
Provide a simple structure  for  classifying  events  by  severity  (e.g.,  low, medium, high) and risk to “level set”  the team regarding urgency, escalation to  the  C-suite,  and  level  of  engagement  of  the representative groups on the incident  response team.
Provide a fl exible frame- work  for  executing  the  eight  key  steps  of  incident  response:  (1)  preparation,  (2)  (3)  assessment,  (4)  communication,  (5)  containment,  (6)  eradication,  recovery,  and  (8) post-incident.
Identify  key  third  parties  that  will  assist  the  company,  including  external privacy counsel, forensics, crisis  communications,  mail  and  call  center  vendor, and credit monitoring.
Don’t  panic when a security incident arises.
Assemble  the  incident  response  team  members and notify them of the security  incident.
It is useful to appoint a  security  incident  manager;  often  this  is  someone with strong project management  skills who can move the process forward  in  a  productive  way  working  alongside  outside  privacy  counsel.
Once  the  team  is assembled, it should initiate an internal  investigation  into  the  security  incident,  and  depending  on  the  potential  severity  of the incident, daily progress calls should  be scheduled.
Conduct an initial  analysis  of  the  reported  incident  and  focus on getting quickly to a point where  the  internal  and/or  external  computer  security fi rm can develop and implement  an effective containment plan.
Working  with  internal resources, at least initially, is very  common;  however,  consider  bringing  in  external security fi rms when the company  is facing capability, credibility, or capacity  issues.
Institute  a  plan  early  on  for collecting all available forensic data— hardware, devices, database activity, and  system  logs—and  transfer  it  to  a  safe  location  for  subsequent  analysis.
Create  a  timeline  of  events  surrounding  the  security  incident  and  the  actions  taken  by  the  company.
Structure  additional  investigation  and  response  efforts  based  on  information  gathered  and  the  scope  of  the  incident.
Work  to  include  any  favorable  fi ndings  in  public  communications;  notifi cation  letters  are  often  attached  to  class  action  complaints  and therefore a company can rely on any   the     CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE     such  helpful  information  when  fi ling  a  motion to dismiss.
Experienced outside privacy counsel that  is  well  versed  in  incident  response  can  help the company quickly and accurately  determine  federal,  and  international  privacy  and  security  laws  and  regulations  that  may  be  implicated  by the security incident.
Complying with  these  laws  is  sometimes  a  balancing  act  that requires a company to consider other  factors.
In addition, offi cers and directors should  receive reports that provide essential facts  and  plans  for  responding  to  the  security  incident.
Further,  develop  a  for  executives  to  use  when  communicating  with the media, affected individuals, and  shareholders.
Also,  consider  creating  a  website  and  using  a  call  center  to  keep  affected  individuals  apprised  of  developments.
Eradicate  remnants  of  the  security  incident  and  recover  business  operations.
When  the  security  incident  and  any  resulting  damage  have  been  contained,  develop  a  plan  to  eliminate  the  vestiges  of  the  security  incident,  restore  the  company’s  assets,  and  return  your  business  to  normal  operations.
Ensure  that  the  threat created by the security incident is  eradicated.
Complications do arise  when only a few state laws are implicated,  such  as  when  one  state  does  not  have  a  “risk of harm” trigger that allows a compa- ny  to  determine  that  notifi cation  is  not  required but the other states do.
Notifi cation Typically, a security incident becomes a data  breach when there is unauthorized access to  unencrypted  personally  identifying  infor- mation  (PII),  which  is  generally  a  person’s  name  associated  with  his  or  her  Social  Security  number,  driver’s  license  number,  health  and  medical  information,  and  fi nan- cial  information,  depending  on  the  state  or  federal  law.
When  a  data  breach  occurs,  all  states  (except  Alabama,  New  Mexico,  and  South Dakota) require that a company notify  the  affected  individuals  that  their  PII  has  been  compromised.
The  breach  notifi cation  laws of each state and the type of data that  are  considered  PII  vary  between  states  and  can create multiple and sometimes inconsist- ent obligations on the company required to  provide  notice.
Most  state  laws  require  notice as soon as reasonably possible, where- as  a  few  require  notifi cation  within  30  or  45 days of discovery.
¦  270   (HIPAA)  and   In  addition,  certain  federal  laws  such  as  Insurance  Portability  and  the  Health  Accountability  Act  the  Gramm-Leach  Bliley  Act  (GLBA)  require  companies  to  notify  affected  individuals.
Under HIPAA, notifi cation is required with- in  60  days  and  a  failure  to  provide  timely  notice  will  likely  result  in  an  investigation  that  may  lead  to  a  fi ne.
Reporting In  addition  to  providing  notifi cation  of  a  data  breach  to  affected  individuals,  a  com- pany also may be required to report a data  breach  to  other  individuals  and  entities  under  certain  state  and  federal  laws  and  industry guidelines.
Telecoms and fi nancial institutions have spe- cifi c  guidelines  regarding  reporting  to  law  enforcement,  but  most  industries  do  not  have  similar  regulations.
Federal  regulators:  Certain  industry- specifi c  laws  also  require  reporting  of  a  breach to federal regulators.
Under  the  GLBA,  fi nancial  institutions must report a security incident  to  their  primary  federal  regulator  as  soon  as possible.
State  attorneys  general  and  agencies:  Some state laws require a company to report  a  data  breach  to  the  state  attorney  general,  depending  on  the  number  of  affected  indi- viduals,  which  may  range  from  1,000  in  some  states  to  only  one  person  in  others.
Other  states  require  notifi cation  to  state  agencies, such as state consumer protection  agencies, departments of health, or cyberse- curity agencies.
Some states require simply that a  copy of the breach notifi cation letter that was  sent to the affected individuals be fi led with  the state attorney general.
Other states may  require more, such as written notice identify- ing the nature of the breach, the number of  affected  individuals,  any  steps  taken  to  investigate and prevent future breaches, and  the  content  of  the  notice  intended  for  the  affected  individuals.
Working  with  regula- tors can be one of the most critical pieces of  an incident response.
Ensure that your out- side privacy counsel has a working relation- ship with your regulators and can guide you  on  the  timing  and  content  of  communica- tions.
Other  entities:  When  payment  card  data  are at risk, the response is governed by pay- ment  card  network  operating  regulations  that merchants have agreed to follow as part  of  the  merchant  services  agreement  with  their acquiring bank and payment processor.
The  card  network  regulations  defi ne  a  spe- cifi c  security  standard  that  merchants  must  comply with (PCI DSS).
They also dictate the  investigatory  process  and  provide  for  the  recovery of noncompliance fi nes and assess- ments to reimburse banks that issued cards     CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE     affected by the incident for their costs associ- ated with fraudulent charges and the reissu- ing of cards.
In certain circumstances, a company may  be  required  to  report  a  data  breach  to  the  media.
Under  state  notifi cation  laws,  if  the  company  does  not  have  suffi cient  contact  information  to  mail  notifi cation  letters  to  affected  individuals,  the  company  has  to  provide  notice  through  substitute  means,  which involves posting a link in a conspicu- ous location on the company’s website, issu- ing a press release to major statewide media,  and  sending  an  email  to  the  individuals  (if  the  company  has  their  email  addresses).
HIPAA  requires  a  press  release  if  a  data  breach involves more than 500 affected indi- viduals.
In other circumstances, a company  may  have  no  legal  obligation  to  report  a  security incident or data breach to the media  but may feel compelled to do so in an effort  to  control  the  story  and  prevent  inaccurate  or  misleading  information  from  being  con- veyed  to  the  public  by  the  hacker,  affected  individuals,  or  other  sources.
Board  of  directors: Although  reporting  a  security incident to the board of directors is  not required by any specifi c state or federal  law,  a  director’s  duty  to  shareholders  requires  that  the  director  be  informed  of  important  topics  that  signifi cantly  affect  the  overall business of the company.
Consequently,  directors  may  (and  should)  require  that  an  incident  response  team  member  (preferably  counsel)  provide  reports  on  any  security  incidents or data breach, and the progress of  any incident response efforts.
Some compa- nies are establishing a special audit commit- tee for cyber incidents and even engaging a  “cyber  advisor”  to  brief  the  board  on  these  issues.
271  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  Lawsuits and/or regulatory action A company’s response to a security incident  or data breach can have signifi cant legal and  fi nancial consequences beyond those associ- ated  with  investigating  and  responding  to  an  incident.
Regulators,  such  as  the  FTC,  Department of Health and Human Services,  and  Federal  Communications  Commission  may initiate investigations that may result in  multimillion-dollar fi nes or the imposition of  a consent order that imposes a lengthy obli- gation to implement a privacy and security  compliance program and have it audited by  a  third  party.
¦   Role of external parties in a company’s   incident response  An  incident  response  typically  requires  the  involvement of several external parties who  serve  important  roles  in  identifying  and  assessing the cause, extent, and impact of a  security incident as well as crafting and dis- seminating  a  response  to  the  affected  indi- viduals, the public, the media, law enforce- ment,  and  regulatory  authorities.
One  step  that may save a few days during an incident  response is to engage and negotiate the mas- ter  services  agreements  with  these  compa- nies  before  an  incident  so  that  only  a  new  statement of work has to be prepared when  an incident arises.
This role includes engaging other  third parties to assist the fi rm in providing  legal  advice  to  the  company,  such  as  a  forensics  fi rm,  which  then  serves  as  a  foundation for establishing that attorney- client  privilege.
An  outside  forensics  fi rm  is  sometimes  needed  to  conduct  an  examination of the available forensic data  to  determine  whether  there  are  signs  of  unauthorized access, and if so, determine  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  issue  and  provide  recommendations  on  short-term  containment and longer-term measures to  remediate and enhance security.
Although  public  relations  fi rms  understand  how  to  get  a  company  into  the  news,  crisis  communications  fi rms  have  to  exercise  a  different  skill  set  in  guiding  the  communication  strategy  for  companies  facing  security  incidents.
They can also provide media training for  the spokesperson and assist in responding  to  media  inquiries  in  a  consistent  and  measured manner.
Regardless of the external parties retained to  assist in an incident response, it is important  to  ensure  that  they  are  retained  by  outside  counsel to enable the assertion of the attor- ney-client  privilege  and  work-product  doc- trine to protect documents and communica- tions  generated  in  the  investigation  and  during the response to a security incident.
It is  also important for offi cers and directors to be  engaged  in  the  incident  response  process,  because  in  the  event  that  another  security  incident  occurs,  the  offi cers  and  directors  could  be  held  accountable  by  consumers,  shareholders, and regulators for any lack of  familiarity with the company’s cybersecurity  program.
Communications  with  the  board  regarding  the  incident  response  and  the  fi ndings  of  any investigation should be carefully craft- ed and limited to factual information if pos- sible, because of the prospect of shareholder   incident     CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE     derivative suits.
and  vetted  by   Should a security incident or data breach  be  made  public,  executives  should  be  pre- pared  to  comment  on  the  incident.
When  necessary,  a  holding  statement  should  be  developed  counsel.
Any  fi l- ings  or  disclosures  with  the  federal  regula- tors,  such  as  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  should  be  carefully  vetted  to  ensure  accuracy,  which  may  prove  diffi cult  when  the  facts  surrounding  a  security  inci- dent are being determined.
¦   Conclusion In  this  ‘cyber  climate,’  companies  must  be  prepared for a security incident.
Offi cers and  directors  cannot  sit  on  the  sideline;  they  must be aware of cyberthreats and engaged  in developing and implementing an incident  response plan to limit the amount of damage  that  can  be  caused  by  a  data  breach.
SecurityRoundtable.org     273  ¦  Communicating after a cyber incident Sard Verbinnen & Co – Scott Lindlaw, Principal  Data security is the number one concern that keeps board  members up at night, NYSE’s annual Law in the Boardroom  survey  found.
As recent shareholder deriva- tive and securities lawsuits underscore, a director is not  merely  responsible  for  ensuring  that  a  company’s  cyber  defenses are robust.
Rather, lawsuits against directors of  Target Corp., the TJX Companies, and Heartland Payment  Systems,  Inc.  have  taught  us  that  directors  must  also  ensure that the company is prepared to manage the after- math of a breach.
To contain the damage, effective com- munications  with  a  host  of  internal  and  external  audi- ences are essential.
The  board’s  oversight  of  this  aspect  of  cybersecurity  should  not  start  in  the  fog  of  a  cyber crisis.
The  most  recent  study,  involving  174  breaches,  found  “the  cumulative  change  in  net  earnings  including  extraordinary  items  in  the four quarters after a breach announcement is a 22.54%  decrease, indicating deteriorated earnings performance.”  These  fi ndings  by  Kholekile  L.  Grebu,  Jing  Wang,  and  Wenjuan Xie of the University of New Hampshire Peter T.  Paul  College  of  Business  and  Economics  do  not  always  hold true.
A study of several prominent data breaches by   275  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  Sard Verbinnen & Co. found that share price  impact is hard to measure because of a mul- titude of factors affecting stocks.
In  the  context  of  cybersecurity incidents, these duties require  directors to ensure the company develops a  reasonable crisis-management plan for use in  the event a breach occurs.
This calls for board  members to have at least a high-level under- standing  of  communications  strategies  and  tactics, for internal and external audiences.
For  example,  almost  all  states  have  laws  requiring  companies  to  notify  customers  when  a  breach  compromises  sensitive  per- sonal  data.
When the law requires it, notifying customers  about a breach is fundamentally a legal func- tion  but  also  a  communications  function.
Likewise,  regularly  disseminating  accurate  information to shareholders may be a regula- tory  requirement  but  also  requires  effective  communications.
The Securities and Exchange  Commission has put companies on notice as  to  the  reputational  harms  of  breaches  and  companies’  disclosure  obligations  regarding  cyber  incidents.
The  Ponemon  Institute  reported  that  in  2014,  breach-related  lost  business  costs,  including  turnover  of  customers,  the  abnormal   ¦  276   increased  customer  acquisition  activities,  reputation losses, and diminished goodwill,  cost the victimized companies an average of  $3.72 million per incident.
This  means  fol- lowing  the  law  on  all  notifi cations  required  to  consumers  and  investors,  of  course.
Communicating  about  a  cyber  incident  to  customers and investors as required by law  should be the bare minimum from a commu- nications  standpoint.
To  achieve  that,  these  princi- ples should guide any communications relat- ing to a cyber incident:   ?
Preserve  the  company’s  credibility  with  all  constituencies,  including  consumers,  customers, partners, regulators, employees,  investors, journalists, and analysts.
Maintain  control  of  the  communications  process  by  establishing  concise,  agreed- upon messages so that the company speaks  with one voice.
Provide  pertinent,  confirmed  facts  without jeopardizing any internal or law  enforcement investigations.
These  should  be  the  tactical  goals  of  com- munications responding to a cyber incident:   ?
Manage  how  the  breach  is  portrayed  in  news  and  social  media—where  possible,  position company as victim, not villain.
An  effective  plan  will  position  the  victimized company to communicate quick- ly  and  effectively  in  the  event  of  a  data  breach or other security incident.
Important  decisions will have to be made in real time,  but the tools and guidelines in a cyber inci- dent  response  plan  should  ensure  immedi- ate engagement of the proper personnel, the  proper process for obtaining and reviewing  information needed to determine the appro- priate communications response, and align- ment  on  all  appropriate  steps  to  communi- cate to employees and external audiences.
A  company’s   incident-response  plan  should  identify  members  of  several  sub- teams,  including  legal,  IT,  and  communica- tions.
Anyone who will be directly involved  in  making  communications  decisions  or  in  the  dissemination  of  internal  and/or  exter- nal  communications  must  read  and  under- stand this plan.
Directors  must  make  clear  to  manage- ment  that  they  expect  the  company  to  be     COMMUNICATING AFTER A CYBER INCIDENT     prepared  to  respond  very  quickly  to  any  cyber incident and to communicate the com- pany’s  position.
As  part  of  this,  the  board  should  review  the  company’s  budget  for  security  risk  management,  ensuring  the  availability  of  the  funds  necessary  to  hire  outside law fi rms, IT and forensics experts,  remediation  support  services,  and  commu- nications consultants.
Consumers, customers, and partners: In  addition to legally required notifi cations,  the breached company must be prepared  to  communicate  what  it  is  doing  to  contain an incident; provide assurances,  if  applicable,  regarding  safety  of  customer  information  and  recourse  on  future  fraudulent  activity;  give  front- line  customer  service  representatives  guidance  on  how  to  communicate  with  customers;  provide  a  dedicated  call  center  and/or  website  to  handle  customer  inquiries;  and  provide  third- party credit monitoring, if appropriate.
The  company  may  also have to proactively engage reporters,  including  and  cybersecurity beat reporters.
This requires  developing  a  process  for  engaging  the  news  media,  including  designating  media  spokespersons,  preparing  key  executives  for  direct  exposure  to  news  media,  correcting  inaccurate  reports,   regional,  national,     277  ¦  INCIDENT RESPONSE  and  monitoring  traditional  and  social  media on an ongoing basis.
Investors  and  analysts:  The  breached  company  must  be  prepared  to  answer  questions about the impact of the incident  on  fi nancial  outlook  and  about  the  costs  of  response  and  security  upgrades.
A  Form  8-K  may  be  required  if shareholders would view the impact of  the incident as material.
Internal  audiences:  Employees  need  to  hear  from  the  company  about  what  has  transpired, and what changes in security  policies  and  protocols  are  coming.
Insurance companies will also be monitoring  public statements if the victimized company  has a cyber incident or other relevant policy  and moves to fi le a claim.
The  cases  against  Target  and  Heartland show how the plaintiffs use deriv- ative and securities suits to blame directors  and offi cers for these alleged sins of commu- nications, or lack thereof:   ?
Target  Corp.:  On  December  18,  2013,  the  blog  Krebs  on  Security  broke  the  news  of  a  major  breach  at  the  retailer.
The  next  day  the  company  confi rmed  it  was  investigating  a  security  breach  involving  stolen  credit  card  and  debit  card information of 40 million customers  who  shopped  in  its  stores.
The  plaintiffs  alleged  that  directors  breached their fi duciary duties by failing  to “timely notify customers of the theft of  their  personal  and  fi nancial  information  [and]  to  accurately  notify  customers  regarding the scope and substance of the  data  breach.”  The  amended  complaint  chronicled a series of statements in which  Target  provided  shifting  information.
The  plaintiffs  also  pre-emptively  argued  that  the  directors’  actions  in  managing the response did not constitute  decisions  under  the  business  judgment  rule,  which  would  have  protected  them  against such a lawsuit.
“The Board caused  Target to disseminate false and misleading  public  statements  concerning,  among     COMMUNICATING AFTER A CYBER INCIDENT     other  things,  the  true  nature  and  extent  of  the  data  breach  at  the  Company,”  the  amended  complaint  stated.
Heartland  Payment  Systems,  Inc.:  On  December  26,  2007,  hackers  broke  into  Heartland’s corporate computer network  and  stole  about  130  million  credit  and  debit card numbers and related card data.
The SQL injection attack on its corporate  network resulted in malware being placed  on its payment processing system.
Plaintiffs  brought  a  securities  class  action against the company after the U.S.  Department  of  Justice  indicted  several  individuals  for  what  was  reportedly  then  the  largest  data  security  breach  in  U.S.  history.
The  plaintiffs  alleged  that  Carr  and  Baldwin  concealed  the  incident  and  made  a  series of materially false and misleading  statements on an earnings call, “outright  den[ying] that a security breach had even  occurred  at  Heartland.”  The  harm  to   investors, the plaintiffs claimed, was that  “Defendants’  misrepresentations  and  omissions obfuscated the Company’s true  fi nancial  condition  and  future  business  prospects, artifi cially infl ating the price of  Heartland’s common stock.”  ¦   Conclusion Cybersecurity is the number one fear keep- ing directors up at night, but they can rest a  little easier by holding management account- able and requiring a current, useful prepar- edness  plan  before  a  crisis.
An  effective  communications plan helps protect the com- pany  after  a  cyber  incident  by  blunting  the  loss  of  reputation  and  customers  and  by  keeping plaintiffs at bay.
Every breach starts with an event outside  a  company’s  control,  and  the  Target  and  Sony  Pictures  attacks  underscore  how  unfolding  events  can  further  buffet  a  com- pany.
However, with a communications plan  that is carefully conceived and rehearsed, a  company  can  meet  its  legal  obligations  to  communicate  and  help  limit  the  secondary  harms  of  a  cyber  incident,  such  as  loss  of  reputation and customers.
It is incumbent on  directors to ensure that the plan’s communi- cations  components  are  ready  to  activate  when the cyber crisis strikes.
SecurityRoundtable.org     279  ¦  Cyber risk management  investment decisions  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  Optimizing investment to  minimize cyber exposure Axio Global, LLC – Scott Kannry, CEO and  David White, Chief Knowledge Offi cer  “We  are  living  in  the  Dark  Ages  of  security.
We  cling  to   outmoded world views and rely on tools and tactics from  the past, and yet we are surprised to fi nd ourselves living  in an era of chaos and violence.”     Amit Yoran, President of RSA;  2015 RSA Conference Keynote  Why begin a chapter about minimizing cyber exposure with  a recent quote criticizing the security industry and raising a  question  about  whether  it  is  even  possible  to  succeed?
Ideally, one can then grasp that a new  way  of  thinking  about  cybersecurity  is  critical  to  succeed  and  look  to  defi ne  a  process  and  methodology  that  gives  security leaders a better foundation to achieve that goal.
Our hope is that few,  if any, security leaders still believe that impenetrability is  achievable.
We’ve  been  subject  to  a  barrage  of  verbiage  such as, “There are only two kinds of companies—those  that know they have been hacked and those that don’t yet  know it,” and hacked executives publicly expressing sur- prise that their organization was successfully victimized,  despite investing in the best possible defense.
However,  that belief was prevalent for many years, and investment  decisions during this “castle-wall” era were fairly easy to  make: focus on buying technological controls to fortify the  perimeter.
A more evolved premise is based on  a mantra such as, “Operate as if the bad guys are already   283  ¦  CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS  inside,”  which  starts  to  balance  perimeter  controls with those that focus on behavioral  monitoring,  segmentation,  and  simulated  internal  environments.
Many  fi rms  still  spend  the  majority  of  their  security  budgets  on  perimeter-focused  controls,  but  spending is now being shared with internal  and reactive controls.
Arguably, it has gotten worse,  in  large  part  because  of  improvements  and  industrialization of the tools and techniques  used by adversaries.
This has led not only to  calls  for  a  rethinking  of  how  security  is  approached  but  also  to  the  practical  reality  that security leaders’ jobs are more diffi cult  than ever: their rate of success at protecting  the  enterprise  seems  to  be  precipitously  declining, along with their job longevity.
Plus, the castle-wall and defense-in-depth  eras exacerbated a problem central to secu- rity leader decision making; they facilitated  a  monumental  buildup  in  the  availability  and  use  of  technological  controls.
Evidence  of  this  is  apparent  at  the  RSA  conference,  where a landscape of thousands of security  providers  displays  their  wares,  each  claim- ing to be the ultimate solution or silver bul- let.
Security leaders ask where to start.
Welcome to the  modern reality for security leaders.
We propose that it is time to evolve into  what  we’ll  call  the  cybersecurity  enlighten- ment  era.
It’s  an  era  that  focuses  on  risk  management,  not  risk  elimination,  and  where  cybersecurity  strategy  is  acknowl- edged  as  an  investment  challenge.
It’s  also  an era that highly values impact minimiza- tion because cyber events are inevitable and  ultimately,  the  organization’s  resilience  depends on having the fi nancial resources to   ¦  284   weather  the  storm.
This  point  supports  the  relevance of the insurance industry, not only  as a provider of fi nancial certainty but also  as an industry that can provide insight and  data  to  support  thoughtful  cybersecurity  investments.
We’ll  now  explain  all  of  these  elements and how this approach stands the  greatest  chance  of  minimizing  exposure  to  the organization.
The approach is best evidenced by Figure 1,  which  depicts  the  relationship  between  cyber  risk  and  cybersecurity  capability.
Organizations that have minimal cybersecu- rity  capability  face  an  extraordinary  degree  of  risk.
For  these  organizations,  investments  in  basic  controls  will  produce  meaningful  downward movement on the risk curve.
It’s  also  the  reality  that  organizations  on  the  far  left side of the curve will be given harsh treat- ment  by  the  insurance  industry—premiums  will be extraordinarily high or coverage may  not be available at all—which is a signal that  the  organization  must  bolster  its  capability  through  traditional  controls.
Unlike a tra- ditional  control,  insurance  actually  reduces  (or  eliminates)  the  cost  of  an  event  and  therefore  shifts  the  entire  risk  curve  down- ward.
An  organization  that  adopts  this  approach  is  one  that  is  more  thoughtfully  protected  and  better  able  to  withstand  the  impact of that inevitable event.
Likelihood  Capability  where  business  impact  is  a  measure  of  impact to the enterprise from a cyber event,  likelihood is an estimate of an event actually  occurring, and capability is a measure of the  organization’s  ability  to  detect,  protect,  respond, and recover from an event.
OPTIMIZING INVESTMENT TO MINIMIZE CYBER EXPOSURE    FIGURE  Risk  Invest in Cyber Capabilities  Sustain Capability & Invest in Insurance  Cybersecurity Capability  Insurance lowers the risk impact curve overall  It is important to understand that organi- zations may have very little control over the  numerator in this equation, as these elements  are  largely  infl uenced  by  the  constantly  evolving  threat  climate,  the  capability  and  desire  of  adversaries  to  carry  out  an  attack,  and  the  ever-increasing  complexity  of  the  technologies  controlling  operations,  which  can  fail  unexpectedly  in  ways  that  result  in  damage.
For example, various recent reports  pegged the cause of a cargo plane crash on a  failure in software confi guration, evidencing  the reality that cyber events aren’t only those  with malicious connotations.
It’s also impor- tant to recognize that neither business impact  nor likelihood can ever equal zero, even for  the most capable organizations.
Organizations can infl uence the denomina- tor by implementing, sustaining, and matur- ing  a  capable  cybersecurity  program.
This  measure refl ects the controls that an organiza- tion has in place to protect its cyber assets and   to detect events.
Many of these controls will be  technological  or  administrative,  but  the  human  element  is  also  critical  and  can’t  be  overlooked,  nor  can  the  protocols  surround- ing  third-party  vendors,  outsourced  parties,  and  subcontractors.
How  does  an  organization  put  actual  numbers into the equation?
Our recommen- dation  is  to  start  with  developing  and  ana- lyzing  organization-specifi c  cyber  loss  sce- narios.
Gather  a  group  of  individuals  that  represent key functions and insights into the  organization—information  technology  and  operational  technology  security,  safety,  risk  management, treasury, and legal— and brain- storm  about  the  likelihood  and  impact  of  cyber events across the critical functions of the     285  ¦  CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS  organization.
It’s important to capture as much  of  the  loss  spectrum  as  possible—fi rst-  and  third-party  fi nancial  damages  and  fi rst-  and  third-party  tangible  damages,  the  latter  half  being  critically  important  for  organizations  that use industrial control systems.
We’ve found that  most  of  the  informational  insight  actually  resides within the organization—it’s simply  a matter of getting the right stakeholders at  the  table.
In  some  instances,  organizations  are  surprised  at  how  much  they  already  know and can bake into the calculations.
For  example,  we’ve  worked  with  energy  fi rms  that  had  already  commissioned  numerous  loss engineering studies based on traditional  perils such as earthquake, fi re, or mechanical  breakdown,  each  with  fully  developed  impact estimates.
All it took in this instance  was  confi rmation  from  operational  and  cybersecurity  leaders  that  a  cyber  event  could produce many of the same outcomes,  coupled  with  a  technical  discussion  about  the likelihood of such an event to very effi - ciently compile enough data for the numera- tor in the equation.
Using  the  loss  scenario  approach  also  helps inform the numbers in the denomina- tor, because the technical part of the discus- sion  helps  determine  the  organization’s  capability  to  protect  its  operations  from,  detect  signs  of,  and  effectively  respond  to  a  particular  scenario.
For  example,  if  we  are  working with a retailer and a scenario involv- ing  the  theft  of  credit  card  information,  we  may  start  with  the  fi nancial  impact  if  the  event occurs and then work backward to dis- cuss where the information resides and how  it is processed, and most critically, how each  access  point  is  or  could  be  protected  from  known  and  conceivable  threats.
Here,  it  is  useful  to  compare  an  organization’s  current  capabilities against any applicable standards  or regulatory frameworks, ensure that appro- priate  threat  intelligence  for  that  particular  area  of  risk  is  being  used,  and  continually  monitor  the  performance  of  the  organiza- tion’s protective mechanisms in its own envi- ronment and the environment at large.
We  recognize  that  many  security  leaders  may  be  wary  of  supplying  cyber  program information for benchmarking pur- poses as to not create additional vulnerabili- ties  by  giving  away  the  proverbial  keys  to  the back door, but resources that do so in an  entirely  de-identifi ed  manner  can  provide  powerful  comparative  insight  that  is  other- wise  unavailable.
From  a  security  leader’s  perspective,  this  information  may  actually  be the most powerful, because it can provide  justifi cation  for  additional  investment  in  controls  and,  in  the  worse  case  event  of  a  breach, exculpability.
This is an appropriate place to introduce  the fi nal detail and insight for the denomina- tor  and  right  side  of  the  risk  curve—the  importance of insurance coverage and rele- vance of the insurance industry to deploying  an  enlightened  cybersecurity  strategy.
One  of the roles that the industry can serve, and  will  increasingly  serve,  is  a  resource  for  benchmarking  intelligence  via  the  under- writing  and  premium  pricing  process.
This  capability is candidly in its infancy for a few  reasons:  the  scope  of  coverage  is  evolving  and  therefore  the  depth  of  information  required to underwrite is not truly compre- hensive, many insurers are happy to deploy  a  nonintrusive  approach  as  a  competitive  lever,  and  correlation  information  lacks  in  areas  where  claims  or  losses  have  not  yet  occurred.
Despite  this  evolving  capability,  fi rms can fi nd meaningful value in the pro- cess,  because  even  an  extraordinarily  high  premium or a denial of coverage does have  informative value.
Additionally, for areas in  which  cyber  coverage  is  relatively  more  mature, top insurers do have enough data to  provide a “risk engineering” benefi t similar  to  other  well-established  areas  of  insured  risk, and the industry is continually evolving  to provide greater capabilities in this respect.
Another  area  of  insurance  industry  rele- vance  requires  a  more  nuanced  dive  into  coverage,  but  one  that  is  important  for  its  informative value and relevance to security  leaders  investment  decisions.
Security     OPTIMIZING INVESTMENT TO MINIMIZE CYBER EXPOSURE    should  familiarize  themselves  with  their  own  fi rm’s  insurance  portfolio  as  well  as  industry  trends  relating  to  coverage  availa- bility and pricing.
The exercise should not be  limited  to  cyber  insurance,  because  despite  what many in the insurance industry would  profess, there is currently no such thing as an  all-encompassing,  all-risk  cyber  insurance  policy.
Cyber  insurance,  as  it  is  commonly  known,  covers  many  fi rst-party  fi nancial  losses  and  resultant  fi nancial  liabilities  from  a cyber event, but not tangible losses such as  property damage and bodily injury.
Therefore,  fi rms also must be attentive to property, casu- alty, environmental, terrorism, and any other  type of insurance that could provide coverage  for losses resulting from a cyber event.
On  one  hand,  simply  knowing  what cyber exposures the insurance industry  is willing to cover can help security leaders  make investment decisions.
For example, the  insurance  industry  currently  does  not  offer  much, if any, coverage for losses attributable  to  the  theft  of  intellectual  property  such  as  trade  secrets  and  R&D.
Knowing  this  may  prompt overweight investment into controls  and  protocols  protecting  trade  secrets,  whereas investment into other areas of risk  where  coverage  is  readily  available  can  be  more balanced.
Beyond the continually evolving risk engi- neering capabilities of the insurance industry  and  the  insight  provided  by  simply  under- standing  the  complete  insurance  landscape  for cyber exposures, the biggest benefi t pro- vided  by  insurance  is  the  aforementioned  ability to meaningfully reduce the risk curve.
Here  too  it  is  critically  important  to  under- stand the entire insurance landscape, because  fi rms that purchase a single cyber insurance  policy  may  be  disappointed  in  how  it  per- forms.
This point is not intended as criticism  of the insurance industry—the industry does  offer  coverage  for  the  vast  majority  of  the  cyber exposure spectrum—it’s a point recog- nizing that comprehensive coverage for com- plex cyber events can involve multiple types  of policies.
Ultimately,  our  hope  is  that  this  process  and  balanced  approach  provides  a  higher  likelihood  of  minimizing  cyber  risk,  espe- cially  in  comparison  to  any  of  the  legacy  strategies deployed to date.
If nothing else, it  helps to more effectively minimize cyber risk  through  the  effective  deployment  of  insur- ance  as  a  complementary  control,  but  the  process  overall  does  produce  defendable  insight and a means by which security lead- ers can optimize investment while minimiz- ing risk, thus allowing cybersecurity to start  to evolve out of the dark ages.
SecurityRoundtable.org     287  ¦  Investment in cyber insurance Lockton Companies Inc. – Ben Beeson, Senior  Vice President, Cybersecurity Practice  A number of high-profi le corporate data breaches, mainly  in the US retail sector over the last two years, have led rap- idly to a major change in enterprise cybersecurity strategy.
Many chief information security offi cers (CISOs) now view  risk avoidance as extremely challenging, if not impossible,  and  a  traditional  approach  that  builds  layered  defenses  around the network perimeter as increasingly insuffi cient.
This approach now  also must weigh the benefi ts of transferring residual sever- ity  risk  from  the  balance  sheet  through  cyber  insurance.
The  emergence  of  the  nation-state  as  an  adversary  leaves  the majority of organizations vulnerable regardless of  the resources committed to defense.
Governance and an enterprise-wide risk management   strategy The emergence of cybersecurity as a governance issue  that  must  be  addressed  by  the  board  of  directors  is  redefi ning  the  role  of  cyber  insurance  as  purely  a  fi nancial  instrument  to  transfer  risk.
Cybersecurity  involves  the  entire  enterprise,  with  numerous  stakeholders,  no  longer  only  the  domain  of  the  IT  department.
Driving a culture of collaboration between  these stakeholders is challenging for many organizations,  but  cyber  insurance  and,  more  importantly,  the  underwriting process can be the catalyst.
SEC  guidance published in 2011 highlights how regulators  see cyber insurance as part of a strong enterprise risk   289  ¦  CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS  management  strategy.
Many  in  the  legal  community  see  the  launch  in  February  2014 of a federal cybersecurity framework  (known  as  the  NIST  framework)  as  creating a standard of care to be used by  plaintiff  attorneys  to  allege  negligence  or  worse.
A fi nancial incentive  Legislators are giving greater prominence  to the role of cyber insurance.
The failure  to  pass  laws  to  drive  stronger  enterprise  security  has  demonstrated  the  challenges  in  trying  to  enforce  minimum  standards.
There is growing support for market-based  incentives  such  as  insurance  that  can  reward  strong  cybersecurity  through  discounted premium or broader coverage.
However, the insurance market for cyber  risks is young, if not embryonic in some  respects, and faces signifi cant challenges  if it is to continue to grow.
Reversing the  lack  of  actuarial  data  to  model  risk  and  an  underwriting  process  that  must  change  to  meet  ever-evolving  threats  sit  at  the  top  of  the  insurance  industry’s  priorities.
Vicarious  risk  to  vendors  and  business   associates Adversaries are focusing increasingly on  third parties that have access to sensitive  information and other critical assets of the  target  enterprise.
Professional  service  fi rms  or  cloud-based  solution  providers  are examples of business associates whose  security may be weaker than that of their  client and consequently provide an easier  back  door  for  the  attacker.
Liability  for  a  breach  of  personally  identifi able  information  (PII)  or  protected  health  information (PHI) typically still rests with  the  enterprise  data  owner,  even  though  a  breach  may  have  occurred  to  the  vendor’s  network.
Cyber  insurance  addresses costs of responding to a breach  and possible privacy regulatory action or  civil litigation.
Cyber  insurance  covers  the employee as perpetrator as well as an    ¦  290     attack  by  a  third  party.
Security is not about compliance  Treating  security  as  a  compliance  exercise  only  will  result  in  failure.
For  example,  many  organizations  that  are  compliant  with  payment  card  industry  data  security  standards  have  been  breached.
Monetizing the cost of cybersecurity  One  of  the  biggest  challenges  to  the  CISO is to quantify cybersecurity risk in  dollar  terms  to  the  executive  team.
Merger and acquisition activity  The  difficulty  the  cybersecurity posture in any acquisition  target leaves the acquirer vulnerable.
Operational technology  sectors   systems   dependent   on  Industry  operational  technology  and  industrial  control  are  particularly  vulnerable.
Built primarily to be available  24/7  and  to  operate  in  isolation,  these  devices are increasingly being connected  to the corporate information technology  network and the Internet.
¦  The cyber insurance marketplace today It  is  estimated  that  more  than  50  insurers  domiciled  mainly  in  the  U.S.  and  London  insurance  market  provide  dedicated  cyber  products  and  solutions  today.
Buyers  are  concentrated  overwhelmingly  in  the  U.S.  with  little  take  up  to  date  internationally,  with  low  demand  in  the  rest  of  the  world.
Cyber  insurance  fi rst  emerged  at  the  end  of  the  1990s,  primarily  seeking  to  address  loss  of  revenue  and  data  restoration  costs  from  attacks  to  corporate  networks.
What does cyber insurance cover?
The  majority  of  premium  spent  by  buyers  was  intended  to  address  increasing  liability from handling personally identifi a- ble  information  (PII)  or  protected  health  information (PHI) and the costs from either  unauthorized disclosure (a data breach) or a  violation  of  the  data  subject’s  privacy.
Insurers  also  continue  to  address  certain  fi rst  party  risks,  including  the  impact  on  revenue  from  attacks  on  corporate  net- works, extortion demands, and the costs to  restore compromised data.
Insurable assets include the following:   ?
PII and/or PHI of employees or consumers Data breach response costs to include the  following:  Notifi cation Credit monitoring IT forensics Public relations Defense  costs  and  civil  fi nes  from  a  privacy regulatory action Defense costs and damages from civil  litigation   ?
Corporate confi dential information  confidential   Addresses  defenses  costs  and  damages  incurred  for  a  breach  of  third-party  corporate  information.
Corporate   information   technology   network Addresses  the  loss  of  income  as  a  consequence  of  network  downtime.
INVESTMENT IN CYBER INSURANCE     Certain insurers will also extend coverage  to  downtime  of  vendors  on  whom  a  policyholder is reliant.
Operational technology  A  few  insurers  have  begun  to  extend  coverage  for  the  information  technology  network  to  also  include  operational  technology  such  as  industrial  control  systems.
Physical assets  Cybersecurity is no longer just about risks  to  information  assets.
Reputation and brand  Insuring  reputational  risk  from  some  form  of  cyber  event  remains  out  of  the  scope  of  the  majority  of  insurers.
What does cyber insurance not cover?
The  increasing diffi culty in simply detecting an  attack and, unlike a breach of PII or PHI, the  frequent  lack  of  a  legal  obligation  to     291  ¦  CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT INVESTMENT DECISIONS  disclose, suggest that a solution is not in the  immediate future.
¦  Leveraging cyber insurance as a risk   management tool  Since  2009  the  marketplace  has  evolved  to  also provide services to help buyers manage  risk.
Popular  with  smaller  enterprises  that  lack  the  resources  or  rela- tionships,  this  innovation  has  been  a  key  component  in  increasing  the  relevance  of  cyber insurance and consequently its growth.
Larger  fi rms  typically  seek  products  based  on breadth of coverage and the fl exibility to  use their own vendor network.
¦  How do insurers underwrite cyber risks?
Historically,  underwriters  have  sought  to  understand the controls that enterprises lev- erage  around  their  people,  processes,  and  technology.
A consensus is grow- ing that this approach is increasingly redun- dant  and  that  insurers  will  seek  to  partner  with  the  security  industry  to  use  tools  that  can  help  predict  and  monitor  the  threat  as  part of the underwriting process to adopt a  more  threat  intelligence  led  capability  as  part of the underwriting process.
In fact, this  already  has  started  to  happen,  as  certain  insurers  have  started  to  use  technology  to  underwrite vendor and M&A activity risks.
Pricing cybersecurity risk remains a challenge.
Fundamentally insurers continue to look  for a strong security culture within the fi rm  as a fi rst step in risk triage.
Additional fac- tors  such  as  industry,  revenue  size,  and  actual  assets  at  risk  also  contribute  to  how  risk is priced.
First class brokers  work  with  their  clients  to  understand  the  assets at risk and how best to address them  either under the existing insurance program  or  through  a  new  dedicated  product.
An  existing  Directors  and  Offi cer’s  policy  form  (D&O)  addressing  management  liability  from a cyber event probably offers suffi cient  coverage.
However, more often than not, lia- bility to the enterprise requires a new dedi- cated product.
A  broker  should  understand  that  insur- ers seek to understand the security culture  of  a  fi rm  and  will  work  to  position  their  clients as best as possible.
For many larger  organizations  this  does  not  involve  com- pleting a written questionnaire and staying  divorced from the process.
Top-tier  underwriters  appreciate  that cybersecurity is not a tick-box exercise.
INVESTMENT IN CYBER INSURANCE        upon  up  front.
Law enforcement  Law enforcement typically is involved in  a  major  security  breach.
In  fact,  many  times  the  FBI,  the  agency  leading  cybersecurity corporate defense, notifi es  the enterprise before it becomes aware of  the  breach.
A  claim  should  not  be  excluded  by  an  insurer  for  failure  to  disclose  as  soon  as  practicable  if  law  enforcement had advised nondisclosure  during the investigation.
¦  Conclusion Cyber insurance has a broader role to play  than  simply  reimbursing  costs  associated  with a loss.
Fundamentally, engaging in an  underwriting process that forces collabora- tion  from  stakeholders  across  the  enter- prise  can  drive  stronger  cybersecurity  resilience.
In addi- tion,  insurers  will  start  to  provide  premi- um-  and  coverage-based  incentives  for  adopting  best  practices  such  as  the  NIST  framework and leveraging preferred tech- nology tools.
Security warranty  Remove any language that tries to warrant  that  security  is  maintained  to  the  same  level  as  represented  in  the  underwriting  submission.
Operational technology  The majority of insurance policies provide  coverage only to the corporate IT network.
If  relevant,  ensure  that  language  is  broadened  to  also  address  operational  technology  such  as  industrial  control  systems.
In the event of a security breach,  a  dedicated  legal  expert  must  take  the  response  lead  not  least  for  attorney  client  privilege.
IT forensics  In a similar vein to choice of counsel, the  preferred  forensics  fi rm  must  be  agreed      SecurityRoundtable.org     293  ¦  Cyber risk and workforce  development  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org  Cyber education: A job never fi nished NYSE Governance Services – Adam Sodowick, President  Whether  it  stems  from  a  lack  of  education,  a  sense  of  ambivalence,  or,  in  some  cases,  malice,  nearly  all  cyber  vulnerabilities begin and end with some degree of human  error.
In  today’s  data-driven  environment,  companies  must establish a culture of responsibility so that all levels  of employees work together to maintain vigilant practices  that mitigate cyber risk.
Despite vast amounts of resourc- es  spent  on  countless  fi rewalls,  security  systems,  and  algorithms  to  ferret  out  breaches,  these  complex  efforts  barely scratch the surface of the problem.
The damages continue to grow with 24% of the more than  5,000  organizations  represented  in  the  2014  PwC  study  reporting being a victim of cybercrime.
As  one  of  the  top  fi ve  most  reported  crimes  against businesses, cybercrime is not merely a technology  problem  anymore.
The  Online  Trust  Alliance’s  (OTA)  2015  Data  Protection & Breach Readiness Guide reports that employ- ees  caused  29%  of  data  breaches  between  January  and  June of 2014, proving that internal weaknesses are a sig- nifi cant area of vulnerability for every organization.
The   297  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  OTA guide further reports that data leaks by  employees  who  lost  documents  or  used  social  engineering  or  fraud  to  access  and  leak  information  were  caused  by  a  lack  of  internal  controls.
Media  did  not  ignore  instances such as Home Depot’s former secu- rity  architect  who  sabotaged  his  previous  employer’s computer network and the April  2015 case in which the Department of Justice  indicted  a  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  employee  for  attempting  to  deliver  nuclear  secrets  to  a  foreign  government  via  spear- phishing tactics.
A  2012  survey  of  global  employees  by  Boston-based  data  storage  and  information  management company Iron Mountain found  that workers often develop a feeling of per- sonal  ownership  when  they  are  involved  with the collection of data.
The  study  found  that  of  those  who  did  steal  company  information,  51%  exited with confi dential customer databases,  46% with presentations, 21% with company  proposals,  18%  with  strategic  plans,  and  another  18%  with  product/service  road  maps—all  of  which  represent  highly  sensi- tive, valuable assets.
These situations can cause severe holes in the  system  and  are  cases  for  organizations  to  change behavior so that employees become a  defensive tool against cyber risk.
The computer manufacturer Dell Inc., for  example, boasts a “culture of security” that  is fostered by the following four fundamen- tal  principles:  security  awareness  training,  proper access management, mobile security,  and  securing  and  monitoring  the  organiza- tion’s networks, according to the company’s  white paper, The Human Side of IT Security.
Kevin Hanes, executive director, Security  and  Risk  Consulting,  Dell  SecureWorks,  describes  how  Dell’s  information  security  unit works with other organizations to deal  with  cybersecurity  issues.
“My  view  is  organizations need to keep in mind that the  bad  actors  are  going  to  typically  follow  a  path of least resistance, and often that path is  the  people,”  he  notes.
This  difference, the study’s authors note, points to  a need to listen more carefully to those in the  “security trenches who are dealing with these  threats.”  ¦   Taking action Once  companies  have  better  awareness  of  the root causes of insider threats, what steps  can  be  taken?
OTA  recently  reported  that  90%  of  data  breaches  occurring  in  the  fi rst  half of 2014 could have been prevented eas- ily by adhering to commonly accepted best  practices for data protection.
For companies   that are behind the curve, this means there is  a lot of work to be done.
In addition to implementing stringent best  practices  and  requiring  employees  to  follow  them, self-reporting is a key component.
Each organization’s management and cul- ture are unique, but looking to what works at  other  companies  can  help  in  understanding  and  making  recommendations  on  sound  starting places that help to benchmark prac- tices and measure success of respective cyber- security defense and mitigation programs.
At  Teradata,  a  leading  data  analytics  provider,  Chief Compliance Offi cer Todd Carver says  cyber awareness is viewed as a funnel, with  new  information  continually  feeding  into  the top and recirculating in the form of ongo- ing  education  to  keep  employees  aware  of  the  latest  developments.
What do I do now?”  Annual  ethics  and  compliance  education  covers a host of issues at Teradata, including  cyber-related  modules  for  intellectual  prop- erty,  privacy,  phishing,  and  mobile-device  awareness.
The company also has policies in  place  regarding  keeping  a  clean  computer,  password practices, and email usage, to name  a few.
CYBER EDUCATION: A JOB NEVER FINISHED     Although  Teradata  works  diligently  to  train employees and maintain awareness of  cyber  issues,  Carver  concedes  the  job  is  never fi nished.
Carver suggests three tips for chief compli- ance offi cers who are working to implement a  more robust cyber awareness program.
First,  begin  with  including  everybody.
Second,  it’s  an  issue  for  all  companies  across all sectors and needs to be prioritized  no matter what the industry.
Finally, remem- ber that what makes an organization vulner- able is the human aspect.
“You could do eve- rything  [right]  technology-wise,  but  could  still  be  vulnerable  because  people  are  involved—employees,  third-party  vendors,  customers, and the bad guys.”  At Dell, Hanes’ SecureWorks group han- dles  security  monitoring,  consulting,  and  threat intelligence gathering for itself as well  as  its  many  clients.
The former is much  easier, but the latter has the potential to offer     299  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  tangible  results.
Creating  an  organization  with a cyber-aware culture requires an ongo- ing commitment, he explains, because even  after  years  of  training  “check-the-box”  employees,  without  a  complete  buy-in  and  understanding, there will still be those who  click on a phishing email link.
¦   Creating a cyber-aware culture Proactive companies such as Teradata, Dell,  and  others  understand  that  effective  cyber  awareness education can transform employ- ees into a powerful force in the fi ght against  cybercrime.
Having  a  culture  of  awareness  can help prevent breaches, keep data secure,  and  positively  affect  a  company’s  bottom  line.
In fact, there’s arguably no greater bar- rier to cyber risk than investing in and sup- porting the right employee culture.
Surprisingly, only 29% of companies sur- veyed  by  NYSE  Governance  Services  and  the  Society  of  Corporate  Compliance  and  Ethics  train  all  their  employees  for  cyber  issues despite the fact that cyber was chosen  one of the top three risk areas for employee  education, according to the 2014 Compliance  and  Ethics  Program  Environment  Report  issued by the same two groups.
A 2015 Cybersecurity in  the  Boardroom  report  published  by  NYSE  Governance Services and Veracode notes that  IT security matters are discussed in most or  every  meeting  by  81%  of  director  respond- ents.
In a separate NYSE Governance Services’  study  with  Spencer  Stuart,  the  2015  What   Directors  Think  Survey,  63%  of  director  respondents  said  they  are  only  somewhat  confi dent that their board is adequately over- seeing cyber risk; nearly a quarter of respond- ents  said  they  are  not  confi dent  about  their  board’s oversight.
These  fi ndings  build  a  strong  case  that  board  members,  along  with  employees,  would  benefi t  from  being  included  in  the  cyber awareness program at their organiza- tion  to  make  better  decisions  and  oversee  cyber risk on an ongoing basis and help set  the  proper  tone  at  the  top.
According  to  Ethisphere’s  2015  World’s  Most  Ethical  Companies  data  set,  66% of respondents had offered their board  formal  training  on  information  security/ cybersecurity within the last two years.
¦   Conclusion There  is  no  substitute  for  a  sound,  well- understood  culture  of  responsibility  and  awareness  with  regard  to  cybersecurity,  a  pervasive risk that begins and ends with the  human  element.
Proofpoint, a Sunnyvale,  California,  security  service  provider,  warns  that  cyber  criminals  are  continually  adjust- ing  to  companies’  employee  education,  so  the  cat-and-mouse  game  is  never  fi nished  and constant vigilance is required.
Although the margin for human error will  never be eradicated, with proper awareness  education  and  follow  through,  companies  can  leverage  their  greatest  asset  to  alleviate  vulnerabilities  and  strengthen  cybersecurity  resistance.
This  information  must  be  understood  and  actionable;  regardless of the executives’ background, having this infor- mation  available  allows  them  to  make  an  informed  deci- sion.
Leaders need the right information, at the right time  to collaborate, communicate, and ultimately make the best  decision.
Information enables the executive to use a deci- sion process or framework of reasoning to help rationalize  the data and choose the best course of action.
As the topic  of cybersecurity rapidly moves to the top of every C-level  executive’s agenda, cyber leaders must embrace the impor- tance of collaboration and communication while building  bridges to ensure decisions are understood and actionable.
¦  Establish a cyber risk decision framework We  live  in  a  time  of  acute  and  persistent  threats  to  our national security, our economy, and our global com- munities.
The number of reported cyber incidents contin- ues  to  grow.
The  threat  of  a  cyber  catastrophic  event  continues to lurk in the distance.
New cyber vulnerabili- ties are reported each day and the frequency of zero-day  threats  is  increasing.
New  victims  make  the  headlines   301  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  weekly.
As a result, cyber leaders continue to  be asked if their organizations are spending  enough  to  address  cyberthreats.
To  answer  this  question,  cyber  leadership  must  have  the facts to establish a decision framework to  guide  them.
Having  a  fi rewall,  purchasing  the latest technologies, growing the number  of cyber professionals, and having informa- tion security policies do not adequately pro- vide  all  the  information  needed  to  answer  this question.
Knowing what data to collect,  demonstrating the ability to get the data in a  timely  fashion,  operationalizing  the  data,  and ensuring the data get to the right deci- sion maker can provide an actionable frame- work.
The  following  are  a  few  examples  of  what  information  is  needed  to  enable  a  framework:   ?
The likelihood of a specifi c exploit, attack,  or  signifi cant  occurrence  is  understood  and utilized in the cyber risk prioritization  framework.
Having trustworthy data is the foundation  to  all  cybersecurity  decision  frameworks.
It is important to have a framework to help  support the fundamental changes required  to  enhance  cyber  practices  and  enable  communication.
Scenario: Cyber risk decision framework Today, the media announces a new zero-day  exploit  that  has  been  identifi ed.
Do they need to contact their third parties   to see if they are secure?
Probability of Occurrence  Having the trustworthy data readily avail- able can allow cyber executives to quickly  and  confi dently  communicate  throughout  the organization and the third parties.
Of  those  50  internal  instances,  only  three  are  external  facing,  and  the  remaining  47  are  internal to the network.
All the third-party  instances  are  internal  to  the  partner’s  network.
The  internal  cyberthreat  team  has reviewed the external intelligence, and  there  are  already  indications  of  potential  miscreants  scanning  for  the  newly  identi- fi ed vulnerabilities.
If  successful,  the  exploit  can  be  used to deliver malicious code throughout  the  organization  providing  kinetic  and  nonkinetic  damage  to  an  organization.
Armed with this information, cyber leader- ship  can  quickly  move  to  gain  consensus,  communicate recommendations, and infl u- ence  the  mitigation  activities  required  to  address the threat.
¦  Defi ning your stakeholders Trustworthy  data  are  a  key  foundation  to  establishing  cybersecurity  creditability.
COLLABORATION AND COMMUNICATION BETWEEN TECHNICAL AND NONTECHNICAL STAFF, BUSINESS LINES AND EXECUTIVES   Performance of executives, regardless if they  work in a line of business, in corporate staff,  or in technology, is often measured by results.
Achieving  results  in  cybersecurity  requires  others  taking  action.
Effective  leaders  can  motivate  groups  of  like-minded  people  to  come  together  and  rally  behind  a  cause  to  achieve a goal.
Finding those individuals in  the  organization  is  critical  to  success.
Identifying  individuals  who  will  become  stakeholders  in  the  cybersecurity  journey  provide the support needed to drive change.
chief information offi cer  ?
chief technology offi cer (CTO)  ?
line  of  business  leaders,  CIO,  CTO,  risk   leaders  In  addition  to  individual  stakeholders,  establishing  a  cybersecurity  steering  com- mittee with cross-organizational representa- tion can provide an additional platform for  collaboration and communication.
The pur- pose of the committee should be to promote  cybersecurity awareness, provide a forum in  which cybersecurity topics can be discussed,  and to solicit cyber feedback to help evolve  cyber  practices  and  mature  over  time.
In  addition, the committee will seek to identify  cybersecurity  topics  that  may  affect  the  broader applicable industry and the emerg- ing trends that may affect the organization.
The cybersecurity committee could:   1.  review  cybersecurity  strategic  direction   and planned initiatives   2.  discuss major milestones for cybersecurity  initiatives  that  are  in  process  of  being  deployed   3.  assess  business   impact  of  material   cybersecurity program changes   4.  discuss lessons learned and situations in   which program adjustment is prudent   5.  identify potential areas of confl ict and/or  resource constraints between cybersecurity  program and business priorities   6.  discuss impacts from and/or to the larger   applicable industry.
Stakeholders  want  the  facts  and  reassur- ance that the information being reporting is  trustworthy  and  actionable.
Proactively  removing  risk  before  the  risk  evolves  in  negative  conse- quence  is  a  signifi cant  measurement  for  success.
Scenario: Defi ning stakeholders You  have  been  asked  by  a  line  of  business  leader  to  provide  information  regarding  a  third party before a contract is signed.
Due  diligence is done for third parties before any  contracts are signed; that is a leading indus- try practice.
However, what if you and your  cybersecurity  team  were  able  to  provide  cyber intelligence that suggests the potential  third-party  partner  is  on  a  top-fi ve  easiest- to-hack  organization  list  being  posted  in  credible  underground  forums?
Having  information  without  being  able  to  make  it  actionable  often  results  in  a  very  heavy  paper weight being created.
In this scenario,  having the cyber intelligence to provide the  stakeholders  helped  provide  transparency  into cyber risks that can produce measured  results.
Maintaining a results-oriented men- tality  coupled  with  the  right  stakeholder  group  can  help  enable  a  cyber  support  culture.
¦  Delivering the message Effective communication, especially during a  time of change, requires frequent touchpoints.
Having a communicator or a communication     303  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  team specifi cally aligned with the cybersecu- rity  team  can  provide  immense  benefi ts.
The  fundamental  goal  is  to  tell  the  cybersecurity  story  throughout  the  organization  through  clear,  concise,  targeted  communications  through  the  most  effective  dissemination channels.
Some  will  prefer “pull” communications and others will  want  the  information  pushed  to  them.
Cultural  appetite,  tone  from  the  top,  and  organizational  commitment  help  drive  the  various  required  communication  delivery  techniques to ensure stakeholders are aware.
Some examples include the following:   ?
provide  platforms  for  cyber  champion   recognition  and   report    ?
track,  measure,   the  effectiveness  of  the  communications  through  communication  dashboard  cyber   a   Having a venue into the corporate commu- nications  team  provides  cybersecurity  the  opportunity  to  align,  infl uence,  and  enable  the infl ux of cybersecurity into normal busi- ness  communications.
It  is  critical  that  the  corporate crisis communication team be part  of the cybersecurity incident response team  because of the potential reputational impact  associated with a signifi cant cyber incident.
During  a  time  of  crisis,  concise  and  timely  communications  to  key  stakeholders  and  customers  can  often  be  the  difference  between an incident being managed and an  incident being exaggerated.
Tactically  positioning  the  cybersecurity  story within the organization through effec- tive education and awareness while address- ing  the  latest  trends  in  cybersecurity  can   ¦  304   help  build  collaboration  by  demonstrating  how  individuals  can  partner  with  cyberse- curity to address customer needs.
Regardless  of  the  industry,  customers  want  to  know  their  information  is  safe  and  the  organiza- tion  that  has  their  data  has  a  clear  plan  to  achieve  that  goal.
Adding  cybersecurity  reminders  in  existing  individual  customer  communications begins to demonstrate that  commitment to the customer.
This  also  holds  true  for  internal  stake- holders.
Often the information and measure- ment of results reported by the cybersecurity  team may not be perceived as positive news.
For  example,  the  cybersecurity  team  may  implement new technology that provides an  enhanced  visibility  into  the  health  and  hygiene of various technology assets.
However,  this  is  a  great  opportunity  leadership  by  explaining  that  it  is  far  better  to  fi nd  these  opportunities  internally  rather  than  be  told  about  these  vulnerability  gaps  from  a  law  enforcement  representative.
These are challenging times;  cyberthreats  are  real  and  present  signifi cant  risks for most organizations.
Communicating  these risks to technical and nontechnical exec- utives  can  often  be  a  daunting  task  that  requires additional background and context to  successfully  communicate  the  message.
The  ability  to  provide     COLLABORATION AND COMMUNICATION BETWEEN TECHNICAL AND NONTECHNICAL STAFF, BUSINESS LINES AND EXECUTIVES   trustworthy data and a cyber decision support  framework enables cyber executives to trans- late a new language to other executives.
These  actions can positively enhance cybersecurity’s  internal reputation by strengthening trust and  credibility across the organization.
Taking the   time to include, educate, and collaborate with  stakeholders  can  build  alliances.
Having  the  right  information  is  powerful,  and  those  stakeholders  who  get  accurate,  timely,  and  meaningful data will have the opportunity to  lead change.
SecurityRoundtable.org     305  ¦  Cybersecurity readiness through  workforce development Booz Allen Hamilton – Lori Zukin, Principal; Jamie  Lopez, Senior Associate;  Erin Weiss Kaya, Lead  Associate; and Andrew Smallwood, Lead Associate  The  demand  for  skilled  cybersecurity  professionals  cur- rently outweighs the supply.
The growing sophistication  of  cyber  adversaries,  coupled  with  our  increasingly  networked enterprises, means that demand will only con- tinue to grow.
To compound this issue, traditional infor- mation technology (IT) roles are increasingly insuffi cient  to address enterprise-wide cybersecurity risks.
A broader  skillset,  including  communication,  change  management,  and  leadership,  is  required  in  order  to  respond  quickly  and collaboratively to evolving cyber threats.
In  light  of  these  challenges,  it  is  clear  that  a  new  approach to workforce planning and development is nec- essary.
This  chapter  covers  fi ve  recommendations  to  improve  your  cybersecurity  workforce, including: (1) rethink your approach to cyber- security, (2) develop alternative talent management strate- gies, (3) empower your cybersecurity leadership, (4) con- nect  your  organization,  and  (5)  invest  in  your  cyber  human capital.
¦   Redefi ne cyber operations in your organization Cyber operations are integral to every business function— a  fundamental  part  of  business  management  in  which  understanding  your  cyberthreat  is  key  to  your  bottom  line.
Coupled with that is a recognition that the IT func- tion and the cyber operations function are not one and the  same.
IT is an infrastructure enabler, whereas cyber opera- tions are an organization-wide risk issue.
A major cyber  breach—one that involves sensitive corporate or customer  data—poses more than a technical problem or a business  continuity challenge.
307  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  In addition, the talent management chal- lenges  for  cyber  operations  are  much  more  complex  because  there  is  a  major  crisis  to  backfi ll cyber talent.
Even once your organi- zations  recruits  top  cyber  professionals,  there  is  no  guarantee  you  will  retain  them.
As such, it is not enough for cybersecurity to  be  relegated  to  a  subset  of  people,  as  with  the  IT  function.
Every  employee  in  your  organization  faces  cyberthreats,  and  talent  management  for  IT  and  cyber  operations  should  not  be  combined.
By  shifting  this  mindset  and  developing  strategies  that  refl ect these realities, your ability to develop  an  effective  workforce  will  immediately  improve.
¦   Develop alternative talent management   strategies  Most  cybersecurity  professionals  are  per- sonifi ed by their love for cutting-edge tech- nology, casual work environments, and crea- tive mindsets.
These unique tendencies help  them  excel  under  the  constantly  changing  cyber  environment  but  differentiate  them  from the rest of your company in a number  of ways—fundamentally, their atypical char- acteristics of (1) work environment, (2) work  preferences,  and  (3)  nontraditional  career  paths.
Recruiting, developing, and retaining this  unique workforce requires alternative talent  management  strategies—strategies  that  are  often  connected  to  but  distinct  from  those  applied across the rest of your company.
Develop an appealing work environment Not every business has a culture of prevalent  ping-pong tables, free food, and a dress code  involving  fl ip-fl ops  and  jeans.
However,  there are environmental factors that compa- nies  must  account  for  in  attracting—and  keeping—the  necessary  talent  for  accom- plishing cyber work.
The nature of cyber work means that it is  often  executed  in  an  environment  that  dif- fers  from  that  of  its  parent  organization.
Think  of  your  cybersecurity  practice  as  the  fast  moving,  quickly  adapting  branch  of  your  organization.
Businesses  that  consider   ¦  308   environmental factors for their cyber work- force are better prepared to adapt to chang- ing threats.
Global  business  trends  have  shown  suc- cessful  cyber  practices  have  fi ve  key  traits:  they  are  agile,  multifunctional,  dynamic,  fl exible, and informal.
Agile: Cyber work requires agility.
Multifunctional:  Cybersecurity  is  a  team  sport.
A strong cyber practice is built of teams  with diverse knowledge sets who can execute  a variety of activities at once.
Inquisitive:  Cyber  professionals  embrace  learning  and  they  will  be  curious;  they  will  want to solve problems regardless of how hard  it is to fi nd the solution.
Because threat actors  across the globe are offering an array of new  threats  to  consider,  your  cybersecurity  work  practice will change based on evolving infor- mation.
With  con- stantly  changing  work  requirements,  your  practice must be enabled to adapt to new areas  of  focus.
Your  cyber  organization  must  be  infused with a strategy that allows for employ- ees to expand or change their roles to increase  your capability’s fl exibility.
Informal: Cybersecurity professionals thrive  in  a  nontraditional  environment.
Your  recruits  and  team  members  will  likely  look  for unconventional working hours and shift- ing duties.
Creating this type of environment  for  your  cybersecurity  professionals  allows  your cyber organization to adjust quickly to  tackle  any  challenge.
Your  cybersecurity  practice  may  have  different  work  locations,  matrixed  reporting  lines,  around-the-clock  shifts, and a more relaxed dress code than the     CYBERSECURITY READINESS THROUGH WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT    majority of your workforce.
The budget pro- cess  for  your  cyber  organization  may  be  centered  around  technological  investments  or  on  a  different  timeline  to  meet  shifting  threats.
Given  the  work  requirements,  it  is  especially  important  that  your  cyber  envi- ronment  has  leaders  who  not  only  share  a  competitive nature and passion for technolo- gy but also have success operating in dynam- ic, multifunctional environments.
Understand work preferences Like the work environment, your cybersecu- rity  professionals  also  have  unique  work  traits.
These traits, or work preferences, make  them  the  perfect  candidates  to  tackle  the  daily  challenges  from  threat  actors  around  the globe but also can separate them from the  rest of your organization.
Recognizing these  work  preferences,  for  your  capability  as  a  whole  as  well  as  on  an  individual  level,  is  critical to developing your cyber talent man- agement strategies.
If  your  cybersecurity  professional  had  a   social media profi le, it may look like this:  Lover and early adopter of new technologies,  as  a  cybersecurity  professional  my  passion  for  technology  fuels  my  curiosity  to  solve  complex  problems.
I  am  a  systems  thinker  with  confi dence  in  my  ability  to  put  things  together  and  learn  new  techniques  while  using  my  competitive  nature  to  fuel  my  work as well as engage in offi ce competitions.
Reward  your  employees  for  forward  thinking,  provide  them  with  con- stantly  changing  tasks  with  different  levels   of  diffi culty,  and  present  opportunities  to  work with emerging technologies.
Create nontraditional career paths Placing  two  cybersecurity  resumes  side  by  side can sometimes feel like you are compar- ing an apple to an orange.
Cyber profession- als have a variety of experiences, only some  with  an  educational  background  in  cyber  and  many  with  certifi cations  to  designate  profi ciency.
Although  it  would  be  nice  if  cyber  professionals  could  be  ‘cyber  warri- ors,’  or  experts  in  all  areas  of  cyber  opera- tions,  your  cybersecurity  professional’s  diverse backgrounds more likely match the  diversity of the cybersecurity fi eld.
Booz  Allen  has  found  that  instead  of  ‘cyber warriors,’ it is much more likely that  your organization’s cyber workforce will be  composed of three types with many subsets  in  each:  senior  leadership,  specialized  experts,  and  generalist  staff.
Instead  of  imposing linear career paths on these cyber  types,  our  work  has  shown  that  cybersecu- rity professionals work better under a ‘build- your-own’ career path option.
Senior leadership cyber professionals are  a rare breed of combined expertise and lead- ership  who  can  manage  teams  and  opera- tions.
With  specialized  experts,  their  deep  know-how within a specifi c group of cyber- security  capabilities  often  makes  them  the  center of the talent war.
Your generalist staff  are early in their cyber careers or have cho- sen a broad role, making them equally high  in  demand  but  commonly  part  of  a  larger  supply pool.
However, attract- ing and retaining cyber professionals requires  alternative pathways that refl ect the diversity  of positions within the fi eld.
For cybersecurity  professionals,  try  providing  a  nonlinear  career path—one that can be horizontal, verti- cal, and diagonal.
Show cybersecurity profes- sionals a set of attributes that describe how to  progress  using  their  experience,  unconven- tional  education,  and  industry  certifi cation.
309  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  This  provides  your  cyber  professionals  with  fl exibility  to  put  the  pieces  together  using  defi ne  career  progression  opportunities  and  opens  up  your  ability  to  recruit  talent  who  want to grow with your organization.
Organizations still struggle to  build,  recruit,  and  retain  a  cybersecurity  workforce.
It depends on the industry, the type of  organization,  and  what  the  organization  is  protecting.
In some organizations, the CISO  may report to the CIO.
No  matter  where  the  CISO  sits  in  your  organization,  you  need  to  give  the  CISO  ‘a  seat at the table’ during regular operations,  for example, when discussing risk analysis,  profi t  reductions,  performance  indicators,  and  other  strategies  in  your  organization’s  balanced  scorecard.
Elevating  the  level  of  your  CISO  during  normal  operations  helps  nurture  leadership,  management,  and  non- technical skills—skills that are critical during  a cyber crisis.
Further, by making the CISO a  member  of  the  C-suite  leadership  team,  you  will  be  able  to  raise  the  level  of  cyber  awareness—and  coordinated  response— across your entire organization.
The  CISO’s  role  within  the  organization  abruptly shifts to hands-on, crisis mode in a  cyber breach.
The  CISO  should  be  fully  immersed  in  directing  the  cyber  response,  working  with  the  computer  inci- dent  response  team  or  security  operations  experts to remediate and minimize damage,  while delegating or outsourcing other roles/ issues such as policy implications, legal, and  public relations.
¦  310   Once  relegated  to  the  IT  department,  cybersecurity  is  now  part  of  a  company’s  core strategic planning and investment port- folio.
That said, many CISOs currently don’t  have the appropriate skill set to deal with all  the overall strategic implications of a major  cyber  breach.
Although  CISOs  likely  have  the  technical  expertise  required  to  fi x  the  problem or at least manage it, they may not  be prepared for the magnitude of other mul- tidimensional challenges that surface during  the crisis.
In addition to technical know-how,  CISOs have to be able to think on their feet,  nimbly and calmly handling the internal and  external nontechnical issues that may arise.
¦   Connect your organization The cyber-ready organization is a connected  one.
Ineffective  collaboration  between  lines  of  business  and  the  cyber  function  limits  data sharing and effective change.
However,  before  you  can  foster  true  collaboration  between  your  lines  of  business,  you  must  have  appropriate  cyber  channels  weaved  throughout  your  organizational  structure.
Your  organization  needs  effective  processes  in place to manage cyber-related communi- cations  and  policies.
This  ‘interconnected- ness’ comes to life when your central cyber  unit  is  feeding  information  to  key  business  leaders and those business leaders are imple- menting  change  throughout  their  lines  of  business  and  communicating  information  back to the core cyber unit.
The cybersecurity  function deserves to be placed at the center  of  your  organization,  to  inform  all  of  your  business units.
Cybersecurity should be viewed as a cen- tral  business  function  that  informs  other  business units.
You also will need strong leaders at the  helm  of  each  business  unit  who  are  bilin- gual  in  business  and  cyber  operations.
Cybersecurity is the new education leaders  have to undergo to lead your organization  effectively.
In  connecting  the  channels  across  your  organization,  all  leaders  must  be  on  the  same  page,  communicating  the  same  message,  implementing  the  same  security measures, with the same vigor.
CYBERSECURITY READINESS THROUGH WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT    FIGURE  Cybersecurity as a central business function  Technology  Human Resources  Finance  Cyber Function  Supply Chain  Operations  Marketing  ¦   Finally, invest in cyber human capital Most leaders in today’s business world agree  cybersecurity  is  important.
However,  when  the  meeting  is  over,  will  they  truly  buy  in  and embrace cybersecurity as a key priority  for  their  divisions?
An  organizational  cybersecurity  plan  can  only  be  as  strong  as  the  weakest  commitment  from  any  key  leader.
It  doesn’t  matter  how  strong your security posture is for individual  departments;  if  one  division  is  vulnerable,  your entire organization is at risk.
An  effective  way  to  improve  the  long- term  security  of  your  company  is  by  investing in your cyber leaders and cyber  workforce.
Investments in technology and  processes go unrealized unless your organ- ization has strong cyber leaders along with  a  capable  workforce  to  defend  your  net- works  and  security.
Successful  organizations  will  invest  in  their  workforce,  give  their  CISO  a  seat  at  the  table,  and  foster  integrated  lines  of  communication  for  the  sharing  of  cyber- related information.
improve  your      SecurityRoundtable.org     311  ¦  Building a cyber-savvy board Korn Ferry – Jamey Cummings, Senior Client Partner;  Joe Griesedieck, Vice Chairman and Co-Leader, Board and  CEO Services; and Aileen Alexander, Senior Client Partner  Given  the  growing  magnitude  and  frequency  of  cyber- security breaches, which have the potential to shake major  corporations  to  their  core,  cybersecurity  has  become  an  issue of enterprise-wide importance.
These incidents have  become commonplace events, and organizations that are  targets  may  suffer  lost  or  stolen  intellectual  property,  damage  or  destruction  of  critical  data  or  infrastructure,  disruptions to critical operations, and loss of confi dence  among customers, investors, and employees.
¦  Startling statistics PwC’s Global State of Information Security Survey 2015 of  more  than  9,700  security,  IT,  and  business  executives  found that the total number of security incidents detected  by  respondents  climbed  to  42.8  million  this  year,  an  increase  of  48%  over  2013.
In a virtual ecosystem that  increasingly  includes  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  tradi- tional  fi rewalls  do  not  ensure  protection,  as  employees  come  and  go  each  day  with  connected  devices,  such  as  smartphones  and  computers,  which  may  wittingly  or  unwittingly  introduce  threats  that  can  threaten  the  sur- vival of the organization.
313  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  This  greatly  expanded  cyberattack  sur- face  and  resulting  breaches  add  up  to  a  huge  price  tag.
The  annual  cost  of  cyber- crime to the global economy is estimated to  be  between  $375  billion  and  $575  billion,  according  to  a  June  2014  study  by  the  Center  for  Strategic  and  International  Studies;  Gartner  Inc.  estimates  that  total  spending  will  grow  8.2  percent  in  2015  to  reach $76.9 billion.
Although CEOs and boards are alert to the  issue  and  the  devastating,  long-lasting  effects of security breaches, there is surpris- ingly  little  knowledge  of  recommended  practices  to  best  position  organizations  defensively  and  enable  quick  and  effective  response  when  the  inevitable  occurs.
Let’s  be blunt: There is no foolproof way of pre- venting security breaches, but a systematic,  proven  approach  can  make  the  difference  between the survival and the demise of an  enterprise.
¦  Alignment at the top Cybersecurity  is  an  insidious  threat,  all  the  more  so  because  breaches,  including  the  most disastrous ones, often are not detected  until the damage is done.
One cybersecurity  fi rm  recently  estimated  that  close  to  three  quarters of security breaches go undetected.
No board or management team can afford to  become complacent.
In  a  relatively  short  time  cybersecurity  has gone from something that was compart- mentalized  and  handled  by  the  IT  depart- ment  to  something  that  is  regularly  on  the  agenda at board meetings.
At the same time  “major  threats”  have  been  redefi ned,  from  identifying  a  Trojan  horse  and  upgrading  anti-virus  software  to  threats  that  strike  at  the very heart of organizations and are capa- ble  of  taking  them  down.
The  view  and   ¦  314   importance of cybersecurity has shifted from  something of marginal interest to the board  to  a  high  priority  that  resides  within  the  board’s risk management framework.
This is a new role for CEOs and directors,  many of whom feel unequipped to deal with  it  because  cybersecurity  does  not  remotely  relate  to  traditional  areas  of  director  exper- tise.
Armed with a tested protocol to combat  cyberthreats  and  the  right  resources,  how- ever,  every  board  should  be  able  to  imple- ment a preparedness and response plan that  will give the board and management team,  as well as investors, the reassurance that the  company is as well positioned as reasonably  possible  to  confront  these  ever-evolving  challenges.
In practical, operational terms, what does  all this mean for the C-suite and the board,  and how can they get started on overseeing  the  many-headed  beast  that  is  cybersecu- rity?
¦  The right questions According  to  Melissa  Hathaway,  private  sector  cybersecurity  expert  and  former  cybersecurity  “czar”  under  Presidents  George W. Bush and Barack Obama, “Until  cybersecurity  is  refl ected  in  balance  sheet  terms, it’s never going to be fully embraced  by  the  board.”  She  emphasizes  that  once  cybersecurity has been identifi ed as a criti- cal risk, it must be managed with the same  rigor  and  processes  applied  to  other  risks  and remain visible on directors’ dashboards  with  key,  comprehensible  metrics.
Unless directors can cut  through  the  technical  jargon  in  what  are  often  massive  amounts  of  information  they  receive, the size of the risk and the steps to   mitigate  it  may  not  be  clear.
Companies  depend on a functioning Internet, which was  never  invented  with  security  in  mind,  and  all that is linked to it.
Among the questions directors should be  asking  regularly  to  ensure  alignment  as  a  team and a fi rm grasp on cybersecurity, says  Hathaway, are the following:   ?
Is cyber risk accounted for in our overall  corporate  planning  process?
The  board  must  be  assured  that  cyber  risk  is  an  element  of  a  broader  risk  framework  and  that  exposures  are  recognized  and  planned for.
What  is  the  process  for  evaluating  security  and  measuring  liabilities?
Boards  should  know  not  only  what  controls  are  in  place  but  also  how  they  are evaluated.
Although  boards  may  not  require  general  technology  expertise,  it  may  be  advisable  to  have  one  or  more  directors  who  understand  IT  and  its  associated  risks,  or  have  a  security  background.
The  CEO  should  have  controls  in  place  that  indicate  how  cybersecurity  is  being  managed  and  the  true  costs  to  the  business,  which  should  be part of an internal and external audit.
If  and  when  a  problem  arises,  a  process  should  be  in  place  for  communicating  effectively,  internally  and  externally,  and  dealing with attendant costs.
¦  Overseeing cyber risk Boards  are  increasingly  adding  directors  with  cybersecurity  backgrounds  and,  more  generally,  security  expertise,  but  boards  should not assume that they need to add a  director  with  this  specialized  background.
Much depends on company specifi cs and the     BUILDING A CYBER-SAVVY BOARD     industry in which it operates, so each board  should  decide  on  a  case-by-case  basis.
Sometimes,  as  noted  above,  the  board’s  most important role lies in asking the right  questions,  which  may  require  business  smarts  and  good  old-fashioned  common  sense  but  not  necessarily  technical  cyberse- curity expertise.
As  overseer-in-chief  of  the  CEO  and  the  business,  the  board  has  a  responsibility  for  managing  the  company’s  risk  portfolio,  of  which  cybersecurity  is  now  a  key  compo- nent.
Proper oversight entails remaining at a  high, supervisory level—not getting dragged  down  into  the  management  weeds—and  boards can properly perform their fi duciary  duties by focusing on a few main areas.
The board must be reassured by the CEO  that the most capable people are in the criti- cal positions, and this extends to the leader- ship and team managing cybersecurity.
Directors should be kept abreast of main  cybersecurity risks, as well as the remedia- tion  process  and  timeline  for  effectively  dealing with them.
Certainly no one expects  directors to be technology wizards, but they  should  be  inquiring  about  safeguards  the  company  has  in  place  to  guard  against  intrusion  and  be  satisfi ed  by  management  that  protection  along  with  response  and  recovery capabilities are adequate.
In addi- tion,  they  will  want  to  be  informed  about  education  for  everyone  throughout  the  organization, to ensure awareness of threats,  and  a  step-by-step  response  plan  to  follow  in the event of a breach.
¦  The board at the nexus Cybersecurity  has  expanded  well  beyond  the confi nes of IT and emerged as a concern  at  the  highest  enterprise  level,  primarily  because  of  the  devastating  potential  effects     315  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  on shareholder value, market share, reputa- tion,  and  long-term  survival.
Cybersecurity  is  an  issue  that  crosses  all  organizational  silos and boundaries top to bottom, encom- passing  people,  culture,  and  risk  manage- ment  and  must  bridge  security,  technology,  privacy,  and  compliance.
Cybersecurity  is,  therefore, taking its rightful place on a short  list  of  the  board’s  crucial  responsibilities,  which now include protecting a company’s  assets,  particularly  digital,  as  part  of  an  organization’s overall risk portfolio.
In fact, managing cyber risk doesn’t differ  signifi cantly from managing more tradition- al forms of risk and must be managed in a  similar way, remaining visible on directors’  dashboards  so  that  is  tracked  and  addressed regularly.
Some  boards  have  determined that they do require this exper- tise  on  their  audit  committee—where  risk  oversight  generally  lives—on  a  special  cybersecurity  subcommittee,  or  on  a  dedi- cated  cybersecurity  committee.
While  some  boards  have  recruited  this  expertise,  many  have not and may not, accessing what they  require  to  keep  them  informed  and  able  to  make key decisions either from internal tech- nology experts or from external consultants  to the board.
CEOs  and  those  who  serve  as  directors  on their boards are generally a smart group  of people, and they don’t have to be subject  matter experts to provide oversight for the  few  crucial  areas—including  strategy  for- mulation,  succession  planning,  and  risk  management—in  which  they  exercise  their  fi duciary duties.
Cybersecurity is yet another  form of risk, but it is a dynamic, still-emerging  form  that  is  new  to  most  directors.
We  are  likely  years  away  from  the  point  where  boards as a whole consider managing cyber  risk familiar terrain, so additional resources   ¦  316   can always be made available should direc- tors need bolstering in this area.
In fact, directors owe it not only to their  shareholders  to  ensure  a  comprehensive  approach  to  monitoring  and  developing  a  proactive approach to tackling cybersecurity  but also to themselves.
With cybersecurity in  the spotlight—where it is likely to remain— directors  could  also  face  personal  risks,  because  D&O  insurance  may  not  be  suffi - cient if boards don’t take what are deemed  appropriate actions.
Boards should consider  adding cyber insurance as part of a compre- hensive approach to enterprise risk manage- ment  if  they  are  to  continue  to  recruit  the  best directors.
According to a recent post on  the Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate  Governance  and  Financial  Regulation,  “no  company  in  the  U.S.  should  forego  buying  cyber  insurance  to  protect  against  the  real,  ever-present risk of a major cyber-attack and  the  massive  costs  associated  with  such  a  breach.”  ¦  A framework to meet the cybersecurity   challenge  Perhaps most important in properly meeting  the  cybersecurity  challenge,  ensuring  pre- paredness  and  a  ready  response  to  any  breaches, directors need a framework, which  can be tailored to the needs of their organiza- tion,  in  which  to  operate.
A  deep  dive  into  each area will link to additional responsibili- ties  and  timeframes,  most  of  which  will  be  the responsibility of management.
The  baseline  for  board  involvement  in  overseeing  cybersecurity  should  comprise  the six following components:   1.
Security strategy.
The board must ensure  that  the  company  has  a  strategic  vision  and  a  tactical  road  map  that  proactively  protect  assets  and  keep  pace  with  escalating threats and evolving regulatory  requirements.
Company  security  policies,  and  responsibilities of all relevant leadership,  should  be  evaluated,  along  with  data   roles   and   security  and  privacy  budgets  to  ensure  they are adequately funded.
Security  leadership.
The  board  must  confi rm  that  the  organization  has  the  credible leadership and talent to develop,  communicate,  an  enterprise-wide  plan  to  manage  cyber  risk.
implement   and    4.
The  board  should  oversee  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  incident  response  plan  that is widely understood, rehearsed, and  stress tested.
The  board  should  periodically review a thorough assessment  of  information  security  capabilities,  targeting  internal  vulnerabilities and external threats.
the  organization’s    6.
Internal  education.
The  board  should  ensure  that  the  company  implements  a  strong  communication  and  education  program  to  create  an  environment  in  which  all  employees  embrace  responsibility for cybersecurity.
¦  A cybersecurity strategy Organizations  must  have  a  cybersecurity  strategy,  lest  they  simply  be  engaged  in  a  game  of  whack-a-mole,  reacting  to  one  threat  after  another  rather  than  having  a  comprehensive  game  plan.
In  part,  effectively  managing  cyberse- curity starts at the top with the board rec- ognizing  what  it  must  manage  and  how  that  will  be  done,  including  additional  resources it may require.
While the board  may  have  ultimate  responsibility  for  the  war  on  cyberthreats,  everyone,  at  every  level of the organization, must understand  his  or  her  role  on  the  front  lines  of  this  ongoing  war,  because  threats  can  come  from anywhere.
Moreover, in an increasingly robust regu- latory  environment  with  cybersecurity  high  on the SEC’s agenda, adherence to best prac- tices  with  a  well-designed  plan  approved  and monitored by the board should prove far  preferable  to  regulations  imposed  from  the  outside.
Given  the  current  direction,  in  the  near  future  it  is  likely  that  publicly  owned  companies will be required to disclose more  information  about  their  cybersecurity  vul- nerabilities, including data breaches.
Ultimately,  boards  should  work  with  senior management to build a cybersecurity- aware  culture  if  they  are  to  truly  protect  their  companies  from  this  relatively  new,  continually morphing, and potentially dev- astating form of risk.
SecurityRoundtable.org     317  ¦  Evaluating and attracting your next  CISO: More sophisticated approaches  for a more sophisticated role Egon Zehnder – Kal Bittianda, Selena Loh LaCroix,  and Chris Patrick  The role of the chief information security offi cer (CISO)  has changed dramatically in the last decade.
The  upgrading of the role is a natural response to the exten- sive technological, societal, economic, and geopolitical  developments  over  the  same  time  period.
For  many  organizations, information—whether customer records,  intellectual property, or strategic planning—is now their  most valuable asset.
As those assets have become more  valuable, they have also become less secure because of  the  increase  in  the  number  and  the  sophistication  of  attackers,  as  well  as  the  vulnerabilities  inherent  in  an  increasingly networked society.
Organizations  endeavoring  to  fi ll  the  CISO  role  must  ensure  that  their  recruitment strategies and candidate evaluation processes  keep pace with these greater expectations, lest those organ- izations increase their risk of unmet security goals, shorter  CISO tenures, and the associated costs.
This is in addition  to the diffi culty of maintaining a consistent security culture  in the shadow of frequently changing information-security  leaders.
¦  Taking a holistic view of CISO candidates Our  observation  at  Egon  Zehnder  has  been  that  when  looking for their next CISO, organizations can benefi t by  taking a broader view of the required qualities and capa- bilities.
Effective  candidate  evaluation  can  be  achieved  by  dividing  a  candidate’s  career  into  its  past,  present,  and  future  components  and  evaluating  each  element   319  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  with the appropriate perspective.
A  candidate’s  credentials,  work  history,  and  track  record  have  always  been  a  cen- tral part of the evaluation process, and for  good  reason.
This  component  includes  examining  the  types  of  organizations  in  which the candidate has worked, their size  and  complexity,  and  which  markets  they  served,  and  then  seeing  what  the  candi- date  accomplished  in  each  role,  what  transformations the candidate has led, and  the  security  record  of  the  organizations  under  the  candidate’s  watch.
These  fi nd- ings provide the raw material, basic facts,  and context for measuring the fi t between  the candidate and role.
Although the CISO  role  has  grown  signifi cantly  beyond  its  technical  roots,  the  technical  expertise  indicated  by  work  history  are  essential  “table  stakes”  for  a  candidate  to  warrant  further consideration.
Until about a decade or so ago, exploring a  candidate’s  work  history  generally  consti- tuted  the  bulk  of  the  assessment  process.
Then  the  realization  emerged  that  what  a  candidate had done so far is a mere subset of  what  a  candidate  could  do,  because  one’s  work experience can never be so broad as to  capture  everything  of  which  someone  is  capable.
Audits  are  responded  to  in  a  timely  fashion,  the  board  of  directors  is  clear  on  the  impact  of information security investments, and  core data assets are well protected.
He  or  she  must  process  disparate  information  and  generate  valuable  insight  regarding  external  issues  such  as shifts in threats and countermeasures  and  internal  matters  such  as  business  implications  of  information  security  policies and protocols.
Transformational leadership: Regardless  of  the  context  into  which  the  new  CISO  is taking the helm—after a major breach,  under  the  glare  of  heightened  board  scrutiny, or with an acquisition that must  be  integrated—he  or  she  will  need  to  transform  systems  to  address  current  challenges,  creating  a  vision  others  buy  into and moving the organization forward  while  keeping  day-to-day  operations  running smoothly.
Relationship  management:  The  CISO  must  be  able  to  lead  in  a  matrixed  environment,  working  diplomatically  with  a  range  of  constituencies  with  different  perspectives  on  information  security,  including  the  board,  the  CEO,  the  CFO,  the  COO,  and  general  counsel.
to  managing  In  addition  internal  relationships,  the  CISO  must  also  leverage  external  networks  that  include  peers  at  other  organizations,  Internet  service  providers,  third-party  security  solution  vendors,  and  law  enforcement  and intelligence agencies.
The CISO must  have the gravitas and infl uence necessary  to  communicate  effectively  with  each  of  these  internal  and  external  groups  in  a  range of conditions, from off-site strategy  sessions to emergency response.
Team  leadership:  Most  organizations  focus  all  their  attention  on  fi lling  the  CISO  position,  leaving  relatively  little  energy  for  establishing  a  pipeline  of  internal talent.
Identifying and developing  internal  information  security  leadership  talent  is  critical  to  the  long-term  success  of the function and should be considered  part of the CISO’s role.
The future: How will the candidate adapt to change  and unforeseen developments?
It  does  not  measure  a  person’s  ability  to  respond  to  fundamental  changes  such  as  those brought about by the current waves of  digital  transformation.
Also,  looking  at  only  experience  and  competencies  means  the  organization  risks  overlooking  candidates  who  may  seem  underprepared  today  but  with  suffi cient  support would be best suited for the future.
Insight:  The  ability  to  gather  and  make  sense of information to suggest previously  unseen opportunities and threats   3.
The  elements  of  potential  add  an  extra  dimension  to  what  is  learned  from  a   competency-based  evaluation  in  the  same  way that examining competencies provides  much  more  depth  than  merely  looking  at  work  history.
Few  CISOs  have  established track records acting as the sort  of strategic leaders—rather than technical  managers—that  the  role  requires  today.
The  key  to  obtaining  the  needed  level  of  detail is in-depth interviews with multiple  informed  references.
Doing  so  requires  the ability to tap an extensive professional  network.
Some  organizations  also  complement  candidate and reference interviews with psy- chometric testing to provide another layer of  objective input for the evaluation process.
Information  security  has  become  a  high-profi le  corporate  concern,  and the bar has been raised on the pool of  qualifi ed candidates.
So even if organizations     321  ¦  CYBER RISK AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT  are  able  to  effectively  evaluate  candidates  against  current  and  future  requirements,  they must also be prepared from the start to  actively sell the opportunity to an audience  that is naturally skeptical.
First, although the CISO is  likely to have some interaction with the  board and C-suite, there will still be many  conversations that affect the information  security  function  to  which  the  CISO  will  not  be  privy.
As  a  result,  the  CISO  will  have  to  rely  his  or  her  supervisor  to  act  as  an  effective  intermediary  in  advocating  for  resources  and  policy  initiatives  and  in  educating  the  board  and CEO on information security issues  as  they  unfold.
Second,  when  the  CISO  needs  to  take  an  unpopular  position  to  strengthen an organization’s information  security  profi le,  he  or  she  has  to  know  there will be support in high places.
“How  deep   is   the  organization’s  commitment  to  information  security?”  This  is  more  than  a  question  of  staff  and  budget  allocation,  although  those  elements  are  certainly  important.
The  CISO wants to know that the C-suite and  the board appreciate the complexity and  uncertainty at the core of the information  security function and the need for making  everyone  in  the  organization,  top  to  bottom,  responsible  for  security.
Although  the  CISO  expects  organizations  to  have  high  standards,  he  or  she  will  avoid  enterprises who refl exively cycle through  security teams.
“What key performance indicators will I  be measured against?” Given that every  large organization must assume that it is  continually  under  cyberattack,  it  follows  that  security  breaches  are  a  matter  of  not  “if”  but  “when.”  Therefore,  it  is  not  realistic for a company to hold its CISO to  a “one strike and you’re out” performance  benchmark.
“Where  will  I  be  in  fi ve  years?”  Those  who lead the information security function  are  like  other  functional  leaders  in  their  range  of  career  ambitions.
For  some,  the  opportunity to lead the function at a quality  organization  is  the  goal;  others,  however,  are looking ahead to a CIO role or even a  broader role in organizational leadership.
It  is important to understand each candidate’s  desires  against  what  the  organization  can  offer.
Long gone are the days when an argument  had  to  be  made  regarding  the  strategic  importance of information security.
In most  organizations,  the  CISO  role  now  has  the  weight and sophistication its responsibilities  require.
Organizations can assess the state of  their CISO recruitment and assessment strat- egies  by  asking  themselves  the  following  four questions:   1.
Have  we  reviewed  the  CISO  reporting  relationship  against  the  information  security  context  of  the  organization  to  ensure  that  the  CISO  is  adequately  empowered  the  organization’s  security  goals?
to  information   accomplish     EVALUATING AND ATTRACTING YOUR NEXT CISO: MORE SOPHISTICATED APPROACHES FOR A MORE SOPHISTICATED ROLE    4.
Do  we  have  an  adequate  professional  development program in place to support  the CISO and his or her team to help them  meet  the  standards  demanded  by  the  function’s heightened importance?
From the answers to these questions, organi- zations can then begin to make the necessary   to  ensure   adjustments  the  approach  and  tools  to  identify  and  attract  the information security talent that can per- form at the level the position now requires.
they  have      SecurityRoundtable.org     323  ¦  Contributor Profi les  Electronic version of this guide and additional content available at: SecurityRoundtable.org       CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES        New York Stock Exchange 11 Wall Street New York, New York 10005 Tel +1 212 748 4000 Web www.nyse.com  TOM FARLEY President, NYSE Group Tom Farley is President of the NYSE Group,  which includes the New York Stock Exchange  and  a  diverse  range  of  equity  and  equity  options  exchanges,  all  wholly  owned  sub- sidiaries  of  Intercontinental  Exchange  (NYSE/ICE).
He held  previous  roles  at  ICE,  including  SVP  of  Financial Markets and President and COO of  ICE  Futures  U.S.,  formerly  the  New  York  Board of Trade.
Prior  to  joining  ICE,  Mr.  Farley  was  President  of  SunGard  Kiodex,  a  risk  man- agement technology provider to the deriva- tives  markets.
He  has  also  held  various  positions  investment  banking  at  Montgomery  Securities  and  in  private  equity  at  Gryphon  Investors.
True Offi ce has won multiple awards across  the  GRC,  Technology,  and  Innovation  seg- ments and has been featured prominently in  many media outlets, including the BBC, the  Wall  Street  Journal,  Forbes,  Fortune’s  annual  500 Issue, and more.
327  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Intercontinental Exchange  5660 New Northside Drive NW 3rd Floor Atlanta, Georgia 30328 Tel +1 770 857 4700 Web www.intercontinentalexchange.com  JERRY PERULLO Chief Information Security Offi cer Email jerry.perullo@theice.com Jerry  Perullo  has  led  the  Information  Security  program  at  Intercontinental  Exchange,  Inc.  (NYSE:ICE)  since  2001.
As  Chief  Information  Security  Officer,  he  is  responsible  for  the  security  of  ICE’s  heavily regulated exchanges and clearing- houses,  including  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange.
Mr. Perullo is an active participant in the  Financial  Services  Sector  Coordinating  Council  (FSSCC)  and  Financial  Services  Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Center  (FS-ISAC), where he serves as Chair of the  Clearinghouse  and  Exchange  Forum  (CHEF).
He  also  co-founded  the  Global  Exchange  Cyber  Security  (GLEX)  working  group  under  the  World  Federation  of  Exchanges  and  serves  on  several  industry  and  customer  advisory  boards  within  the  cybersecurity industry.
Prior to ICE, Mr. Perullo was a Principal  Consultant  at  Digital  Consulting  and  Software  Services  providing  information  security  testing  and  consulting  services  to  the  health-care,  energy,  and  data  service  industries  and  built  an  Internet  Service  Provider in the mid 1990s.
¦  328   Palo Alto Networks Inc. 4401 Great America Parkway Santa Clara, California 95054 Tel +1 408 753 4000 Web www.paloaltonetworks.com  MARK D. MCLAUGHLIN Chairman, President, and CEO Mark D. McLaughlin joined as president and  CEO  of  Palo  Alto  Networks  in  August  of  2011 and became Chairman of the Board in  2012.
Prior  to  Verisign, he was the Vice President of Sales  and  Business  Development  for  Signio  and  was instrumental in driving the acquisition  of Signio by Verisign in 1999.
Before joining  Signio, he was the Vice President of Business  Development for Gemplus, the world’s lead- ing  smart-card  company.
Previous  to  Gemplus, he also served as General Counsel  of  Caere  Corporation  and  practiced  law  as  an  attorney  with  Cooley  Godward  Kronish  LLP.
In 2014 President Obama appointed Mr.  McLaughlin as the Chairman of the National  Security  Telecommunications  Advisory  Committee  (NSTAC).
CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  DAVIS Y. HAKE Director of Cybersecurity Strategy As  Director  of  Cybersecurity  Strategy,  Davis  Y.  Hake  is  responsible  for  building  and  sharing  the  company’s  strategy  for  cybersecurity thought leadership and deliv- ering  valuable  information,  insights,  and  instructional  tools  on  all  things  related  to  cyberthreats and today’s security landscape.
Prior to joining Palo Alto Networks in 2015,  Mr.  Hake  was  a  leader  in  U.S.  government  cybersecurity serving in the White House, at  senior levels in the Department of Homeland  Security, and as a policy expert for the U.S.  Congress.
Mr.  Hake  also  drafted  some  of  the  fi rst  comprehensive  cybersecurity  legis- lation,  for  which  he  received  a  Federal  100  Award  for  leadership  in  the  IT  community.
He  is  a  graduate  of  the  University  of  California–Davis, where he studied interna- tional relations and economics and received  a Masters degree in Strategic Security Studies  from the National Defense University.
Mr.  Kannry’s  entire  career  has  been  in  the  commercial  insurance  industry  with a focus on cyber and previously spent  10  years  in  the  Financial  Services  Group  at  Aon.
He works with clients in all industries  but specializes in those with evolving cyber  risks,  such  as  energy,  utility,  transportation,  and  manufacturing.
Mr. Kannry received a BS and BA from Case  Western  Reserve  University,  a  JD  from  the  Northwestern  School  of  Law,  and  his  MBA  from the Kellogg School of Management.
Axio is a  cyber risk-engineering fi rm that helps organi- zations  implement  more  comprehensive  cyber risk management based on an approach  that  harmonizes  cybersecurity  technology/ controls  and  cyber  risk  transfer.
Mr.  White  works  directly  with  Axio  clients  and  is  responsible for the frameworks and methods  that guide Axio’s services, including cyberse- curity  program  evaluation  and  benchmark- ing,  cyber  loss  scenario  development  and  analysis,  insurance  program  analysis,  and  data analytics.
Previously,  Mr.  White  worked  in  the  CERT  Program  at  Carnegie  Mellon’s  Software  Engineering  Institute,  a  cyberse- curity  research  program  primarily  funded  by the U.S. Department of Defense and the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security.
While there, he was responsible for techni- cal  leadership  and  research  strategy  for  a  portfolio  of  cybersecurity  and  resilience  maturity  models  and  frameworks  and  associated  research,  diagnostic  methods,  and training.
Mr. White served as chief architect for the  Electricity Subsector Cybersecurity Capability  Maturity Model (ES-C2M2) and served on the  review  team  for  the  oil-and-natural-gas  ver- sion  (ONG-C2M2)  and  industry-agnostic  version  (C2M2).
Mr.  White  co-authored  the  CERT Resilience Management Model (CERT- RMM) and served as the chief architect for the  Smart Grid Maturity Model (SGMM).
329  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Baker & McKenzie 815 Connecticut Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20006 Tel +1 202 452 7000 Web www.bakermckenzie.com  DAVID C. LASHWAY Partner Email david.lashway@bakermckenzie.com David C. Lashway leads Baker & McKenzie’s  global  cybersecurity  practice  and  is  located  in Washington, DC.
He focuses his practice in  the  areas  of  crisis  management,  internal  investigations,  and  complex  criminal,  civil  and administrative litigation and has signifi - cant experience advising clients with respect  to  various  aspects  of  cybersecurity-related  matters.
Mr. Lashway is a sought-after law- yer who advises the Fortune 100 on the full  lifecycle  of  enterprise  risks  associated  with  information  security,  including  before,  dur- ing,  and  after  a  network  breach,  as  well  as  federal  regulatory  and  criminal  matters.
His  clients  include  investment  banks,  publicly  traded  and  private  companies,  trade  associations,  and  individual  managers,  and  his  matters  span the globe.
He  co-leads  the  cybersecurity  practice.
His  practice in the cybersecurity area focuses on  internal  investigations,  data  security  com- pliance, privacy litigation, and information   ¦  330   governance  advice.
He  routinely  counsels  companies  victimized  by  cybercriminals  to  investigate  the  underlying  incident,  coordinate  with  law  enforcement,  and  manage  consumer-related  civil  litigation  and  regulatory  investigations.
Mr.  Woods  has  signifi cant  experience  handling  gov- ernment  investigations  and  business  crimes,  privacy  litigation,  class  actions,  information  governance,  and  electronic  discovery  matters.
He  regularly  oversees  and  advises  on  the  intersection  between  data  protection  issues  and  data  collection  issues  associated  with  internal  investiga- tions and litigations.
She previously  held the position of Head of Litigation at the  BBC,  where  she  regularly  advised  the  Executive Board and senior management on a  wide  range  of  high-value,  high-profi le  dis- putes  and  investigations.
Ms.  Banno  advises  clients  in  the  areas  of  regulatory  and  public  law, defamation and media law, data protec- tion, freedom of information, and commercial  disputes.
She also advises clients on the legal  aspects of crisis and reputation management,  including  handling  internal  investigations  and  appearing  before  Parliamentary  Select  Committees.
BRANDON H. GRAVES Associate Email brandon.graves@bakermckenzie.com Brandon H. Graves is a member of Baker &  McKenzie’s  global  cybersecurity  practice  and  is  located  in  Washington,  DC.
He  has  extensive  experience  in  conducting  investigations  and  advising  clients  before,  during, and after cybersecurity incidents.
He  represents  clients  in  a  variety  of  industries        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  on  incident  response  matters  and  related  disputes.
Mr. Kobus focuses his practice in the  area of privacy and data security.
He advises  clients,  trade  groups,  and  organizations  regarding  data  security  and  privacy  risks,  including  compliance,  developing  breach  response  strategies,  defense  of  regulatory  actions, and defense of class action litigation.
Mr.  Kobus  counsels  clients  involved  in  breaches  implicating  domestic  and  interna- tional  laws,  as  well  as  other  regulations  and  requirements.
He is invested in his client rela- tionships  and  approaches  engagements  practically and thoughtfully.
CRAIG A. HOFFMAN Partner Email cahoffman@bakerlaw.com Craig A. Hoffman provides proactive coun- sel  on  the  complex  regulatory  issues  that  arise from data collection and use, including  customer  communications,  data  analytics,  emerging  payments,  cross  border  transfers,  and  security  incident  response  prepared- ness.
He  uses  his  experience  as  a  litigator  and works with hundreds of companies who  have faced security incidents to help clients  develop  a  practical  approach  to  meet  their  business goals in a way that minimizes regu- latory  risk.
Mr.  Hoffman  conducts  incident  response workshops—built upon applicable  notifi cation laws and guidelines, “good” and  “bad” examples from other incidents, and a  tabletop  exercise—to  prepare  companies  to  respond  to  security  incidents  quickly,  effi ciently,  and  in  a  manner  that  complies  with  applicable  law  while  mitigating  risk  and  preserving  customer  relationships.
Mr.  Hoffman  also  serves  as  the  editor  of  BakerHostetler’s Data Privacy Monitor blog,  providing commentary on developments in  data  privacy,  security,  social  media,  and  behavioral advertising.
F. PAUL PITTMAN Associate Email ppittman@bakerlaw.com F. Paul Pittman provides guidance to clients  in responding to data security incidents and  data breaches, ensuring that they meet their  response and notifi cation obligations under  state  and  laws.
Mr. Pittman also advises clients on data pri- vacy  and  security  issues  that  may  arise  in  their  business  and  assists  them  with  the  development  of  data  privacy  notices  and   federal  data  privacy     331  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  policies to ensure compliance with applica- ble laws and industry standards.
In addition,  he counsels clients on the permissible collec- tion of data and usage in online advertising  in  compliance  with  online  and  mobile  data  standards.
Booz Allen Hamilton 8283 Greensboro Drive Hamilton Building McLean, Virginia 22102 Tel +1 703 902 5000 Web www.boozallen.com  WILLIAM (BILL) STEWART Executive Vice President Email Stewart_William@bah.com William  (Bill)  Stewart  currently  leads  the  Commercial  Cyber  Business  for  Booz  Allen  Hamilton.
In  this  role  he  leads  teams  that  develop  strategies  and  implement  solutions  for  the  most  complex  issues  facing  Private  Sector  Organizations.
Current clients include  C-suite executives as well as senior govern- ment  offi cials.
He helps clients create cutting  edge  strategies  that  optimize  and  secure  critical business systems.
Mr.  Stewart  and  his  team  help  clients  develop  state-of-the-art  cyber  solutions,  including  Threat  Intelligence,  Advanced  Adversary Hunt, Incident Response, Insider  Threat,  and  Identity  and  Access  Control.
Mr. Stewart also led Booz Allen Hamilton’s  Cyber  Technology  Center  of  Excellence   ¦  332   (COE)  with  more  than  3000  staff  members,  and he built a large Technology Consulting  and  Integration  Business  focused  on  the  U.S. government.
Before  joining  Booz  Allen,  Mr.  Stewart  worked for a major electronics fi rm, where he  developed  communications  security  and  key  management  devices.
JASON ESCARAVAGE Vice President Email Escaravage_Jason@bah.com Jason  Escaravage  is  a  leader  in  the  Strategic  Innovation  Group  for  Booz Allen  Hamilton.
He is an expert in the systems devel- opment  lifecycle,  software  solution  design  and development, and intelligence support to  real-world mission operations.
Mr.  Escaravage  is  recognized  for  leading  large-scale,  complex  information  technology  (IT) and analytical support programs support- ing government and commercial clients and in  multiple  focus  areas,  including  conventional  operations,  counter-terrorism,  anti-money  laundering,  and  cyberthreat  analysis.
He holds a degree in Military  History  and  Computer  Science  from  Rutgers  University  and  is  a  certified  Project  Management Professional (PMP).
SEDAR LABARRE Vice President Email Labarre_Sedar@bah.com  Sedar LaBarre is a Vice President with Booz  Allen  Hamilton,  where  he  leads  the  fi rm’s        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  commercial  High-Tech  Manufacturing  Practice.
Mr. Labarre leads a multi-disciplinary team  focused  on  helping  companies  realize  tech- nology-enabled growth from advanced ana- lytics, military grade cyber, and cutting-edge  IT transformation.
Mr. Labarre is a recognized international  expert  in  cybersecurity  standards  and  was  the  chief  architect  of  Booz Allen’s  CyberM3  reference model.
He has worked extensively  within  all  sectors  of  the  U.S.  government  (cabinet-level  agencies,  all  branches  of  the  military, the intelligence community, as well  as several small to micro government agen- cies);  public  sector  clients  in  the  United  Kingdom, Europe, and the Middle East; and  within  the  private  sector  areas  of  fi nancial  services,  retail,  telecommunications,  con- sumer  products,  industrial  manufacturing,  and automotive.
for   the   she   LORI ZUKIN Principal Email Zukin_Lori@bah.com Lori  Zukin  is  a  leader  with  Booz  Allen  Hamilton,  where  leads  People  Innovations  firm’s  Strategic  Innovations Group.
She has direct- ed  several  high-profi le  projects  for  federal  and commercial organizations, providing tal- ent  management  expertise  to  help  them  improve the bottom line.
Most  recently,  Ms.  Zukin  worked  with  a  global pharmaceutical company to dramati- cally  improve  how  a  newly  formed  senior  leadership team manages and measures per- formance while reducing risk during a period  of signifi cant growth.
In other client engage- ments she has worked with large organiza- tions  to  help  them  implement  cutting  edge  solutions  for  cyber  talent  management  and  leadership  development.
She  was  also   instrumental  in  developing  Booz  Allen’s  CyberSim  tool,  an  immersive  training  and  assessment  tool  used  to  select,  train,  and  place cyber professionals.
She is a certifi ed executive coach  through  International  Coaching  Federation.
His  recent  client  engagements  include  working  with  staff  members  of  a  major automaker to reimagine their approach  to vehicle cybersecurity and partnering with  them  to  build  new  capabilities.
Mr.  Cosgrove  previously  worked  with  clients  in  the  U.S.  government national security market, devel- oping new methods in risk analytics.
333  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  MATTHEW DOAN Senior Associate Email Doan_Matthew@bah.com Matthew  Doan  leads  Booz  Allen’s  Commercial  Cyber  Strategy  practice  while  also serving as a leader in the fi rm’s High- Tech Manufacturing business.
He specializ- es  in  driving  innovative  cybersecurity  and risk management solutions, particularly  for  automotive,  industrial,  and  consumer  product companies.
Mr. Doan provides fun- damental knowledge in large-scale maturity  assessments,  enterprise  risk  management,  strategic  planning,  organizational  change  management, and governance.
Mr.  Doan  holds  an  MA  in  Security  Studies  from  Georgetown  University  and  a  BBA  in  Computer Information Systems from James  Madison  University,  as  well  as  a  Graduate  Certifi cate  in  Applied  Intelligence  from  Mercyhurst University.
TONY GAIDHANE Senior Associate Email Gaidhane_Tony@bah.com Tony Gaidhane is a dynamic and innovative  information  security  leader  with  a  strong  background  in  implementing  IT  security,  compliance  (including  NIST  and  ISO),  pri- vacy, and risk management.
His most recent  experience  includes  diverse  engagements  such as leading the assessment of high-risk  technology  platforms  for  attack  surface  reduction  for  a  large  retailer,  leading  the  build of a Cyber Incident Response Playbook  for a large fi nancial institution, and leading a  supply  chain  cyber  risk  assessment  for  a  large  high-tech  client.
Mr.  Gaidhane  has  more than 17 years of experience with cyber- security, and his experience includes manag- ing  large  Affordable  Care  Act  implementa- tions  in  multiple  states  for  Accenture,  as  a  senior  leader  in  its  Information  Security  Practice  and  as  a  Director  of  Information   ¦  334   Security  for  WellPoint,  Inc.  Mr.  Gaidhane  holds  an  MBA  from  Duke  University’s  Fuqua  School  of  Business  and  also  BS  and  MS  degrees  in  Computer  Science  from  Nagpur  University  (India)  and  Texas  Tech  University,  respectively.
He  also  holds  numerous  certifi cations,  such  as  the  PMP,  CISSP,  CISM,  CGEIT,  CRISC,  CISA,  and  CIPP/US  in  the  fi elds  of  Information  Security,  Audit,  Information  Privacy,  and  Project Management.
JAMIE LOPEZ Senior Associate Email Lopez_Jamie@bah.com Jamie  Lopez  is  a  leader  with  Booz  Allen  Hamilton’s  Strategic  Innovation  Group,  where  he  provides  thought  leadership  and  talent solutions to his client base across the  commercial  and  federal  sector.
He  helps  drive  Booz Allen’s  TalentInsightTM  Solutions  focusing  on  Data  Science  and  Cyber  and  Predictive  Intelligence.
In  addition  to  his  core  consulting  and  advisory  duties,  Dr. Lopez serves as the Booz Allen Program  Manager  for  a  large  human  capital  vehicle,  where he leads a sizable team in the devel- opment of HR Shared Services, Competency  Modeling,  Talent  Placement  &  Acquisition,  Change Management, Promotional Systems,  and Professional & Leadership Development.
In this capacity he specialized in tal- ent  management,  individual  assessment,  and personnel selection.
He  also  holds  an  MBA  in  Finance with a specialization in Trading and  Portfolio  Management  from  the  Fordham  Graduate  School  of  Business,  a  BA  in        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Psychology  from  the  College  of  the  Holy  Cross, and an Advanced Graduate Certifi cate  in  Counterintelligence  from  Mercyhurst  University.
JAMES PERRY Senior Associate Email Perry_James@bah.com  James Perry is a Chief Technologist in Booz  Allen  Hamilton’s  Strategic  Innovation  Group, where he leads the commercial cyber  incident  response  planning,  investigation,  and  remediation  services  offerings,  includ- ing  our  National  Security  Cyber Assistance  Program  Certifi ed  Incident  Response  capa- bility.
Mr.  Perry  works  with  chief  informa- tion  security  offi cers,  security  operations  center directors, and incident response teams  across  fi nance,  retail,  energy,  health,  manu- facturing,  and  public  sectors.
In  this  role,  he helps organizations to design and imple- ment Cyber Security Operations capabilities  to  protect  from,  detect,  and  respond  to  advanced  cyberthreats.
Mr.  Perry  leverages  his experience supporting incident response  investigations across multiple sectors to help  these organizations prepare for and rapidly  contain cyber incidents.
LAURA EISE Lead Associate Email Eise_Laura@bah.com Laura  Eise  is  a  cybersecurity  consultant  in  Booz  Allen’s  commercial  practice.
In  this  role, she works with leaders across multiple  industries  in  aligning  cybersecurity  pro- grams to manage risk and meet the needs of  the  business.
She  specializes  in  program- matic  assessment,  incident  response,  enter- prise risk management, strategy setting, and  organizational design.
Recently, she has led  teams across the fi nancial, retail, and manu- facturing  industries  to  create  three-year  strategy roadmaps to improve their cyberse- curity  programs.
Ms.  Eise  is  a  co-author  of  the  CyberM3  maturity  model  and  co-leads  the fi rm’s internal investment in the capabil- ity.
She is an Associate Business  Continuity Manager with Disaster Recovery  Institute International, a Certifi ed Information  Privacy  Professional,  and  received  a  gradu- ate certifi cate from University of Maryland in  Cyber Security.
KATIE STEFANICH Lead Associate Email Stefanich_Katie@bah.com  Katie  Stefanich  is  a  management  consultant  that specializes in cyber incident management  strategy,  cyber  education  and  outreach,  and  crisis communication.
She has strong experi- ence  in  authoring  enterprise-wide  cyber  incident  management  strategies  for  retail,  energy,  and  high-tech  commercial  organiza- tions.
Ms. Stefanich helps clients understand  cybersecurity in terms of risk management, as  well as identify and build cross-organization  relationships  for  smooth  incident  response.
She  also  has  extensive  experience  providing  strategic  counsel  to  startups,  entrepreneurs,  and  organizations  interested  in  using  lean  startup methodology.
Prior to her time at Booz  Allen, Ms. Stefanich implemented integrated  marketing campaigns for high-tech commer- cial organizations.
She  has  more  than  15 years of experience designing and manag- ing strategic transformation programs, most  recently serving as an external consultant on  cybersecurity  workforce  and  organization  issues  to  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  and  a  number  of  large  fi nancial  services institutions.
Ms. Weiss Kaya has served as an external  consultant  to  Fortune  500  companies,  state  government  agencies,  and  non-profi ts  and  as  an  internal  strategic  advisor  and  execu- tive.
She  has  led  large  projects  for  effective  change implementations as well as cyberse- curity  human  capital  strategies,  including     335  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  the  hiring,  compensation,  development,  and  allocation  of  cybersecurity  workforce.
She also manages Booz Allen’s internal ini- tiative  in  Cybersecurity  Workforce  and  Organization,  where  she  established  a  new  service offering and designed a suite of tools  to  support  clients  in  the  development  and  maturation of their cybersecurity workforce  capabilities.
project  management   providing strategy, competitive analysis, pro- cess  improvement,  organizational  design,  and  support  to  commercial  and  government  clients.
Ms.  Wong  works  with  clients  to  seize  busi- ness  opportunities  while  navigating  risks  around connected products and the data used  to power them.
CHRISTIAN PAREDES Associate Email Paredes_Christian@bah.com Christian  Paredes  is  an  Associate  on  Booz  Allen Hamilton’s Predictive Intelligence team  within the fi rm’s Strategic Innovation’s Group  (SIG), where he focuses on cyberthreat intel- ligence (CTI) and CTI program development  for commercial clients.
Mr. Paredes has expe- rience helping commercial clients to produce  actionable  threat  intelligence  for  internal  stakeholders at the operational and strategic  levels.
He has expertise in analytic tradecraft  and  production  standards;  technical  threat  intelligence;  intelligence  workfl ow  integra- tion with security operations; and threat intel- ligence  program  development.
He  has  also  worked  with  global  organizations  to  assess  their information security capabilities.
Mr.  Paredes  holds  an  MS  degree  in  International  Affairs  from  Georgia  Institute  of  Technology  and  a  BA  degree  in  Political  Science  from  Georgia  College & State University.
WAICHING WONG Associate Email Wong_Waiching@bah.com  Waiching  Wong  is  part  of  Booz  Allen  Hamilton’s high-tech manufacturing practice,   ¦  336   BuckleySandler LLP 1250 24th Street NW, Suite 700 Washington, DC 20037 Tel +1 202 349 8000 Web www.buckleysandler.com  ELIZABETH E. MCGINN Partner Email emcginn@buckleysandler.com Elizabeth  E.  McGinn  is  a  partner  in  the  Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of  BuckleySandler  LLP, where she assists clients in identifying,  evaluating,  and  managing  risks  associated  with privacy and information security prac- tices  of  companies  and  third  parties.
Ms. McGinn advises clients on privacy and  data security policies, identity theft red fl ags  programs, privacy notices, safeguarding and  disposal  requirements,  and  information  sharing  limitations.
She  also  has  assisted  clients in addressing data security incidents  and  complying  with  the  myriad  security  breach  notifi cation  laws  and  other  U.S.  state  and  federal  privacy  requirements.
Ms. McGinn is a frequent speaker and author  on a variety of topics, including privacy and  data  security,  consumer  fi nancial  services  litigation,  electronic  discovery,  and  vendor  management.
Ms.  McGinn  received  her  JD,        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  cum  laude,  from  The  American  University,  Washington  College  of  Law  in  2000,  and  received  the  Mooers  Trial  Practice  Award.
Ms. McGinn has been recognized  with the fi rm’s Privacy, Cyber Risk, and Data  Security  practice  group  in  Legal  500  (2013  and 2015).
RENA MEARS Managing Director Email rmears@buckleysandler.com Rena  Mears  is  a  Managing  Director  at  BuckleySandler  LLP,  where  she  focuses  on  data risk, cybersecurity, and privacy.
She has  more  than  25  years’  experience  advising  fi nancial  services,  hospitality,  technology,  bio-tech,  and  consumer-focused  companies  and boards on effective methods for address- ing  data  asset  risks  while  operating  in  com- plex  business  and  regulatory  environments.
Prior  to  joining  BuckleySandler,  Ms.  Mears  was  a  partner  in  a  Big  Four  advisory  fi rm’s  Enterprise  Risk  Services  practice,  where  she  founded and led the Global and U.S. Privacy  and Data Protection practice.
She has signifi - cant  experience  building  and  implementing  multinational and enterprise data risk, priva- cy  and  security  programs,  performing  com- pliance assessments, developing cybersecuri- ty  initiatives,  and  leading  breach  response  teams.
Ms.  Mears  has  served  on  industry  standards committees and company advisory  boards for privacy and security.
She regularly  researches,  speaks,  and  publishes  on  data  risk, privacy, and cybersecurity and holds the  CISSP, CIPP, CISA, and CITP certifi cations  STEPHEN (STEVE) M. RUCKMAN Senior Associate Email sruckman@buckleysandler.com Stephen  (Steve)  M.  Ruckman  is  a  senior  associate  in  the  Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of  BuckleySandler,  where  his  practice  focuses  on privacy, cyber risk, mobile payments, and   data  security,  as  well  as  federal  and  state  investigations and enforcement actions.
Mr. Ruckman joined BuckleySandler from  the  Federal  Communications  Commission,  where he served as Senior Policy Advisor to  Commission’s  Enforcement  Bureau  Chief,  advising  him  on  enforcement  strategies  in  the areas of privacy and data security.
Prior to his time at the FCC, Mr. Ruckman  spent  fi ve  years  as  an  Assistant  Attorney  General at the Maryland Attorney General’s  offi ce, where he was the fi rst Director of the  offi ce’s Internet Privacy Unit.
The Unit played  a leading role in several multistate investiga- tions  into  practices  that  threatened  consum- ers’ online privacy and security, including the  largest privacy settlement in AG history.
Mr.  Yankov  represents  clients  in  a  wide range of litigation matters, including  class actions and complex civil litigation, as  well as government enforcement matters.
His  government  enforcement  experience  includes  representing  clients  before  the  Consumer  Financial  Protection  Bureau  (CFPB),  the  New  York  Department  of  Financial  Services  (DFS),  and  various  state  regulators and attorneys general, as well as in  cases involving unfair, deceptive, and abusive  acts and practices (UDAAP).
Mr. Yankov also counsels clients on elec- tronic  discovery  issues,  including  matters  related to document and data retention, data  assessment,  data  extraction  strategies,  and  pre-litigation discovery planning.
337  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  The Chertoff Group 1399 New York Avenue, NW Suite 900 Washington, DC 20005 Tel +1 202 552 5280 Web www.chertoffgroup.com  MICHAEL CHERTOFF Co-Founder and Executive Chairman Email Emily.Dumont@chertoffgroup.com  (assistant) is  Co-Founder  and  Michael  Chertoff  Executive Chairman of The Chertoff Group,  a premier global advisory fi rm that focuses  exclusively  on  the  security  and  risk  man- agement  sector  by  providing  consulting,  mergers and acquisitions (M&A), and risk  management  services  to  clients  seeking  to  secure  and  grow  their  enterprises.
In  this  role, Mr. Chertoff provides high-level stra- tegic counsel to corporate and government  leaders on a broad range of security issues,  from  risk  identifi cation  and  prevention  to  preparedness, response, and recovery.
From 2005 to 2009, Mr. Chertoff served as  Secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland  Security (DHS), where he led the federal gov- ernment’s efforts to protect our nation from a  wide  range  of  security  threats,  including  blocking potential terrorists from crossing the  United States border or allowing implemen- tation of their plans on U.S. soil.
In  this role he investigated and prosecuted cases  of political corruption, organized crime, and  corporate fraud and terrorism—including the  investigation of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
¦  338   JIM PFLAGING Principal Email jim.pfl aging@chertoffgroup.com Jim Pfl aging is the global lead for The Chertoff  Group’s  business  strategy  practice.
Based  in  Menlo  Park,  California,  Mr.  Pfl aging  works  closely  with  leading  technology  companies,  private equity investors, and system integra- tors to identify, diligence, acquire and build,  exciting companies.
Based on dozens of suc- cessful client engagements, Mr. Pfl aging has  become a trusted advisor on technology and  security  to  many  in  the  U.S.  Government  and  private  industry.
Mr.  Pfl aging  has  more  than  25  years  of  Silicon  Valley  experience  including 15 years as chief executive offi cer of  cybersecurity and data management compa- nies.
He serves on the board of several secu- rity companies and is a frequent speaker on  technology and security issues.
MARK WEATHERFORD Principal Email mark.weatherford@chertoffgroup.com  or andrea.katzer@chertoffgroup.com  (assistant) Mark  Weatherford  is  a  Principal  at  The  Chertoff Group, where he advises clients on a  broad array of cybersecurity services.
As one  of the nation’s leading experts on cybersecuri- ty, Mr. Weatherford works with organizations  around the world to effectively manage today’s  cyberthreats  by  creating  comprehensive  security  strategies  that  can  be  incorporated  into core business operations and objectives.
Prior  to  joining  The  Chertoff  Group,  Mr.  Weatherford  served  as  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security’s  fi rst  Deputy Under Secretary for Cybersecurity.
In this position, he worked with all critical  infrastructure sectors as well as across the  federal  government  to  create  more  secure  network  operations  and  thwart  advanced  persistent  cyber  threats.
He  previously        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  served  as  the  Chief  Information  Security  Offi cer  for  the  states  of  Colorado  and  California and as Vice President and Chief  Security  Offi cer  for  the  North  American  Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC).
Coalfi re 361 Centennial Parkway, Suite 150 Louisville, Colorado 80027 Tel +1 303 554 6333 Web www.coalfi re.com  RICK DAKIN Chief Executive Offi cer (2001-2015) Rick  Dakin  provided  strategic  manage- ment  IT  security  program  guidance  for  Coalfi re and its clients.
After serving in the  U.S.  Army  after  graduation  from  the  U.S.  Military Academy at West Point, Mr. Dakin  began  his  management  career  at  United  Technology Corporation.
Prior to co-found- ing  Coalfi re,  he  was  President  of  Centera  Information Systems, a leading eCommerce  and  systems  integration  fi rm.
He  was  a  past  president  of  the  FBI’s  InfraGard  pro- gram,  Denver  chapter,  and  a  member  of  a  committee hosted by the U.S. Secret Service  and  organized  by  the  Joint  Council  on  Information Age Crime.
He has more than 25 years of  experience building, operating, and growing   public  and  private  companies  in  the  busi- ness process outsourcing, marketing servic- es, enterprise software, smart-grid, informa- tion,  and  IT  services  industries.
He  has also served as CEO of Activant Solutions,  an  enterprise  software  company;  chairman  of WebClients, an internet affi liate marketing  fi rm;  CEO  of  Interelate,  Inc.,  a  marketing  services fi rm; CEO of MessageMedia (NASD:  MESG),  an  email  marketing  services  com- pany; CEO of Neodata Services, Inc., a direct  marketing  services  fi rm;  and  was  founding  CEO  of  GovPX,  a  provider  of  government  securities  data.
Over  the  past  10  years,  Mr.  Jones  has  served  as  director  of  numerous  public  and  private  companies  including  Work  Options  Group,  StarTek, Exabyte, Activant Solutions, Realm  Solutions,  SARCOM,  WebClients,  DIMAC,  and Fulcrum Analytics.
339  ¦  NIGEL L. HOWARD Partner Email nhoward@cov.com Nigel  L.  Howard,  a  partner  in  Covington’s  New York  offi ce,  helps  clients  execute  their  most  innovative  and  complex  transactions  involving  technology,  intellectual  property,  and data.
He  has  represented  companies  in  transactions  covering  the  full  spectrum of data-related activities, including  data capture and storage, business and oper- ational intelligence, analytics and visualiza- tion,  personalized  merchandizing,  and  the  related  cloud  computing  services,  such  as  Data as a Service and Analytics Infrastructure  as a Service.
She  represents  and  advises  technology  compa- nies, fi nancial institutions, and other clients  on data collection, use, and disclosure prac- tices,  including  privacy-by-design  strate- gies  and  email  marketing  and  telemarket- ing  strategies.
This  regularly  includes  advising  clients  on  privacy  and  data  secu- rity issues relating to third-party risk man- agement.
Ms.  Canter  also  has  extensive  experience  advising  clients  on  incident  preparedness  and  in  responding  to  data  security breaches.
CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Covington & Burling LLP One City Center 850 Tenth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001-4956 Tel +1 202 662 6000 Web www.cov.com  DAVID N. FAGAN Partner Email dfagan@cov.com David  N.  Fagan,  a  partner  in  Covington’s  global privacy and data security and inter- national practice groups, counsels clients on  preparing  for  and  responding  to  cyber- based  attacks  on  their  networks  and  infor- mation,  developing  and  implementing  information  security  programs,  and  com- plying  with  federal  and  state  regulatory  requirements.
Mr.  Fagan  has  been  lead  investigative and response counsel to com- panies in a range of cyber- and data security  incidents,  including  matters  involving  mil- lions of affected consumers.
KURT WIMMER Partner Email kwimmer@cov.com Kurt  Wimmer  is  a  Washington  partner  and  U.S.  chair  of  Covington’s  privacy  and  data  security  practice.
Mr.  Wimmer  advises  national  and  multinational  companies  on  privacy, data security, and digital technology  issues  before  the  FTC,  the  FCC,  Congress,  the  European  Commission,  and  state  attor- neys general, as well as on strategic advice,  data  breach  counseling  and  remediation,  and privacy assessments and policies.
He is  chair of the Privacy and Information Security  Committee of the ABA Antitrust Section and  is  a  past  managing  partner  of  Covington’s  London offi ce.
Mr.  Redmon  is  the  Managing  Editor  of  the  North  Carolina  Law  Review.
Under  his  leadership  Dell  SecureWorks  has  become  a  recognized  global  leader  in  information  security  services,  helping  organizations  of  all sizes protect their IT assets, reduce costs,  and  stay  one  step  ahead  of  the  threats.
Previously Mr. Cote held executive positions  with Talus Solutions, a pricing and revenue  management  software  fi rm  acquired  by  Manugistics  in  2000.
He  joined  Talus  from  MSI Solutions, where he was Chief Operating  Offi cer,  and  his  early  career  included  international  assignments  with  KPMG.
In this capacity he is a practicing cybersecu- rity  consultant  and  the  leader  of  the  Delta  Risk business.
Prior  to  joining  Delta  Risk,  Mr.  Fuhrman  was the founder and president of 3tau LLC, a  specialized  consulting  fi rm  providing  infor- mation  security  and  technology  advisory,  analysis, and strategy services to senior clients  in  commercial  industry  and  government,  in  the United States and internationally.
He is a  former Partner at Booz Allen Hamilton, where  he  led  a  $100  million  consulting  practice  in  cybersecurity  and  science  and  technology  serving Department of Defense clients.
Mr.  Fuhrman  has  more  than  35  years  of  military and government experience and has  expertise  in  many  areas  including  cyberse- curity  strategy,  policy,  and  governance;  cybersecurity  controls  and  technology;  and  risk management.
Mr.  Fuhrman  has  degrees  in  electrical  engineering,  mechanical  engineering,  and  mathematics  and  is  a  Certifi ed  Information  Systems Security Professional (CISSP).
Based  in  the  fi rm’s  New  York  offi ce,  Mr.  Bittianda  advises  and  recruits  senior  executives  in  technology,  telecommunica- tions,  and  fi ntech,  with  a  special  focus  on  emerging  technologies.
He  also  leads  the  fi rm’s Cybersecurity Practice.
He  was  previously  an  Engagement  Manager  at  the  Mitchell  Madison  Group.
Mr. Bittianda started his career in technology  and  roles  at  Unisys  and  International Paper.
leadership   Mr.  Bittianda  earned  a  BTech  in  Naval  Architecture  at  the  Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  MA  in  Industrial  Engineering  from  Purdue  University,  and  an  MBA  from  Harvard Business School.
Based  in  the  fi rm’s  Dallas  offi ce,  she  is  global  leader  of  the  Legal,  Regulatory and Compliance Practice and of  the  Global  Semiconductor  Practice.
She   ¦  342   recruits  senior  legal  and  technology  execu- tives  for  Fortune  500  and  private-equity  owned portfolio companies and consults to  boards of directors on a range of issues.
Prior to joining Egon Zehnder, Ms. LaCroix  was  a  senior  international  attorney  with  major international law fi rms as well as serv- ing  in  house  at  Texas  Instruments  and  Honeywell  International,  where  she  was  Asia  Pacifi c  General  Counsel.
Ms.  LaCroix  began  her  career  as  an  attorney  in  private  practice  at  Gray  Cary  Ware  &  Freidenrich  (now  DLA  Piper)  in  California  and  in  Singapore,  focusing  on  mergers  and  acquisi- tions, intellectual property, and admiralty law.
She  holds  an  LLB  from  the  National  University  of Singapore and is admitted to practice law  in  Singapore,  California,  and  the  United  Kingdom.
Based in the fi rm’s Dallas  offi ce,  he  is  a  trusted  advisor  for  CIO  and  C-suite talent strategy and development for  global  companies  across  a  diverse  set  of  industries, including retail/consumer prod- ucts, IT services, industrial, fi nancial servic- es, and digital.
As the global leader for Egon  Zehnder’s  Chief  Information  Officer  Practice,  Mr.  Patrick  advises  some  of  the  world’s  leading  corporations  on  talent  development  and  assessment  at  the  board  level and across the executive suite.
Prior to joining Egon Zehnder, Mr. Patrick  was  CIO/Vice  President  of  Mergers  and  Acquisitions  with  Chatham  Technologies,  a  start-up telecommunications systems manu- facturer/integrator.
Previously,  he  was  a  Senior  Manager  with  Ernst  &  Young  Consulting  and  MD80  Project  Manager  for  McDonnell Douglas in Los Angeles.
CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Fidelis Cybersecurity 4416 East West Highway Suite 310 Bethesda, Maryland 20814 Tel 1 800 652 4020 or +1 617 275 8800 Web www.fi delissecurity.com  JIM JAEGER Chief Cyber Strategist Email jim.jaeger@fi delissecurity.com Jim  Jaeger  serves  as  Chief  Cyber  Strategist  for  Fidelis  Cybersecurity,  responsible  for  developing  and  evolving  the  company’s  cyber  services  strategy  while  synchronizing  it  with  product  strategy.
Mr.  Jaeger  previ- ously  managed  the  Network  Defense  and  Forensics business area at Fidelis, including  the Digital Forensics Lab.
He also held lead- ership  roles  for  a  wide  range  of  cyber  pro- grams, including General Dynamics’ support  for the DoD Cyber Crime Center, the Defense  Computer  Forensics  Lab,  and  the  Defense  Cyber Crime Institute.
His military  service  includes  stints  as  Director  of  Intelligence for the U.S. Atlantic Command,  Assistant  Deputy  Director  of  Operations  at  the  National  Security  Agency,  and  Commander  of  the  Air  Force  Technical  Applications Center.
Mr. Jaeger frequently  advises  organizations  on  strategies  to  mitigate  damage  caused  by  network  breaches  and  prevent  their  reoccurrence.
He  also  presents  on  Large  Scale  Breach  “Lessons  Learned”  at  cyber  symposiums  worldwide.
RYAN VELA Regional Director, Northeastern North  America Email rvela@fi delissecurity.com Ryan Vela brings expertise in large-scale breach  incident  response  management  to  Fidelis  Cybersecurity.
He has 15 years’ experience in   led   large-scale  breach   conducting  investigations  and  digital  foren- sic analysis and has served as Director, Lead  Investigator,  Quality  Assurance  Manager,  and Forensic Examiner.
For the past 12 years  he  has  incident  responses for the private and public sectors,  specializing in organizational strategies, inci- dent  response,  network  security,  computer  forensics,  malware  analysis,  and  security  assessments.
Also  during  this  time  Mr. Vela served as a Strategic Planner at the  Defense  Computer  Forensics  Laboratory  (DCFL)  and  Defense  Cyber  Crime  Institute  (DCCI),  where  he  established  operational  improvements  and  laboratory  accreditation.
One Marina Park Drive Boston, Massachusetts 02210-1878 Tel +1 617 521 7033 Web www.fr.com  GUS P. COLDEBELLA Principal Email coldebella@fr.com Gus P. Coldebella is a principal at the law fi rm  of Fish & Richardson concentrating on cyber- security,  litigation,  and  government  investi- gations.
From 2005 to 2009, he was the deputy  general counsel, then the acting general coun- sel,  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security, focusing on all major security issues  confronting  the  nation.
As  the  department’s  top lawyer, Mr. Coldebella helped lead imple- mentation of President Bush’s Comprehensive  National Cybersecurity Initiative, designed to  shore up the government’s civilian networks  from attack and to promote information shar- ing and cooperation between the public and  private sector.
As  a  securities  litigator,  he  is  well positioned to advise public companies  on  SEC  disclosures  regarding  cybersecurity  and  boards  of  directors’  corporate  govern- ance responsibilities to oversee and manage  this important enterprise risk.
Her  practice  focuses  on  white  collar  defense,  cybersecurity  and  trade secret theft, internal investigations, and  complex commercial litigation, including sig- nifi cant state and federal appellate experience.
Georgia Institute of Technology North Ave NW Atlanta, Georgia 30332 Tel +1 404 894 2000 Web www.gatech.edu  JODY R. WESTBY, ESQ.
Adjunct Professor Email westby@globalcyberrisk.com Jody R. Westby is CEO of Global Cyber Risk  and provides consulting services in the areas  of  privacy,  security,  cybercrime,  and  cyber  governance.
She is a professional blogger for  Forbes  and  also  serves  as Adjunct  Professor  at  Georgia  Institute  of  Technology’s  School  of Computer Science.
¦  344   senior  managing  director   Previously, Ms. Westby launched In-Q-Tel,  was  at  PricewaterhouseCoopers,  was  senior  fellow  and  director  of  IT  Studies  for  the  Progress  and  Freedom  Foundation,  and  was  director  of  domestic  policy  for  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce.
Ms.  Westby  practiced  law  at  Shearman  &  Sterling  and  Paul,  Weiss,  Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
She  is  co-chair  of  the  American  Bar  Association’s  Privacy  &  Computer  Crime  Committee  (Science  &  Technology  Law  Section)  and  co-chair  of  the  Cybercrime  Committee  (Criminal  Justice  Section)  and  served  three  terms  on  the  ABA  President’s  Cybersecurity Task Force.
Ms. Westby speaks  globally  and  is  the  author  of  several  books  and articles on privacy, security, cybercrime,  and  enterprise  security  programs.
She  has  special expertise in the governance of privacy  and  security  and  responsibilities  of  boards  and  senior  executives.
She  is  author  of  the  2008,  2010,  2012,  and  2015  Governance  of  Enterprise  Security  Reports  and  was  lead  author  of  Carnegie  Mellon  University’s  Governing for Enterprise Security Implementation  Guide.
In  addition,  Ms.  Carter  serves  as the head of the ISS Global Policy Board,  which develops the ISS Global Proxy Voting  Policies.
Considered by indus- try  constituents  to  be  one  of  the  leading  experts on corporate governance issues, he is  active on the U.S. speaking circuit and plays  an integral role in ISS’s policy development.
Internet Security Alliance 2500 Wilson Boulevard Arlington, Virginia 22201 Tel +1 703 907 7090 Web www.isalliance.org  LARRY CLINTON President Email lclinton@isalliance.org Larry  Clinton  is  President  of  the  Internet  Security  Alliance  (ISA).
He  is  the  primary  author  of  ISA’s  “Cyber  Social  Contract,”  which  articulates  a  market-based  approach  to  securing  cyber  space.
In  2011  the  House  leadership GOP Task Force on cybersecurity  embraced  this  approach.
The  ISA  document  is  the  fi rst and most often referenced source in the  President’s  “The  Cyber  Space  Policy  Review.”  He  is  also  the  primary  author  of  the Cyber Security Handbook for corporate  boards published by the National Association  of  Corporate  Directors  (NACD)  in  2014.
He  has published widely on various cybersecu- rity  topics  and  testifi es  regularly  before  Congress  and  other  government  agencies  including  the  NATO  Center  for  Cyber  Excellence.
345  ¦  Kaye Scholer LLP The McPherson Building 901 Fifteenth Street NW Washington, DC 20005-2327 Tel +1 202 682 3500  Web www.kayescholer.com  ADAM GOLODNER Partner Email adam.golodner@kayescholer.com Adam Golodner is a partner and the Leader  of the Global Cybersecurity & Privacy Practice  Group at Kaye Scholer LLP, a leading global  law fi rm.
Mr. Golodner represents companies  on  cyber  and  national  security  matters  globally—including  public  policy,  litigation,  corporate governance, and transactions.
Prior  to  joining  Kaye  Scholer,  he  spent  ten years as an executive at Cisco Systems,  Inc.,  where  he  led  cyber  policy  globally.
Before  Cisco,  Mr.  Golodner  was  Associate  Director  of  the  Institute  for  Security,  Technology and Society, Dartmouth College;  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Antitrust  Division,  United States Department of Justice: Deputy  Administrator of the Rural Utilities Service,  USDA;  and  Search  Manager,  The  White  House  Offi ce  of  Presidential  Personnel  (on  leave from law fi rm).
Mr. Golodner is also a Senior Advisor at  The  Chertoff  Group,  a  member  of  Business  Executives  for  National  Security  (BENS),  and a Fellow at the Tuck School of Business.
A co-founder of the fi rm’s global  Cybersecurity,  Privacy  and  Data  Protection  practice  group  and  a  member  of  the  fi rm’s  global  Insurance  Coverage  practice  group,  Ms.  Anderson  concentrates  her  practice  in  insurance coverage litigation and counseling  and  emerging  cybersecurity  and  data  priva- cy-related issues.
A recognized  national  authority  in  insurance  coverage,  cybersecurity,  and  data  privacy–related  issues, Ms. Anderson frequently lectures and  publishes  extensively  on  these  subjects.
In  addition to helping clients successfully pur- sue contested claims, Ms. Anderson counsels  clients  on  complex  underwriting  and  risk  management  issues.
She  has  substantial  experience in the drafting and negotiation of  “cyber”/privacy liability, D&O, professional  liability,  and  other  insurance  placements.
¦  346        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Korn Ferry 2101 Cedar Springs Road Suite 1450 Dallas, Texas 75201 Tel +1 214 954 1834 Web www.kornferry.com  AILEEN ALEXANDER Senior Client Partner Email aileen.alexander@kornferry.com Aileen Alexander is a Senior Client Partner  and  co-leads  Korn  Ferry’s  Cybersecurity  Practice.
Based  in  the  fi rm’s  Washington,  D.C.,  offi ce,  she  has  led  senior  executive  searches across the security domain.
She also  partners  with  the  fi rm’s  Board  &  CEO  Services practice.
Prior to the talent management profession,  Ms.  Alexander  was  a  Professional  Staff  Member on the Committee of Armed Services  in  the  U.S.  House  of  Representatives.
Previously, she was a Presidential Management  Fellow in the Offi ce of the Secretary of Defense  and served as a Captain in the U.S. Army.
JAMEY CUMMINGS Senior Client Partner Email jamey.cummings@kornferry.com Jamey Cummings is a Senior Client Partner  in  Korn  Ferry’s  Global  Technology  and  Information  Offi cers  Practices,  and  he  co- leads  the  fi rm’s  Global  Cybersecurity  Practice.
Based in the fi rm’s Dallas offi ce, he  is  also  a  member  of  the  fi rm’s  Aviation,  Aerospace & Defense Practice.
Prior to Korn Ferry, Mr. Cummings served  as  an  associate  principal  in  the  industrial,  supply chain, and transportation and logis- tics  practices  of  another  leading  executive  search  fi rm,  where  he  executed  executive  search  assignments  for  public  and  private  equity-backed companies.
Earlier in his career, Mr. Cummings was a  consultant  with  The  Boston  Consulting  Group in Dallas and, before that, he served  nine  years  with  distinction  as  an  offi cer  in  the U.S. Navy’s SEAL teams.
He focuses primarily on engagements  for  board  director  searches  across  multiple  industries, as well as working with boards of  directors  on  succession  planning  and  other  related senior talent management solutions.
Mr. Griesedieck’s prior experience includes  two terms as global chief executive offi cer of  another  international  search  fi rm.
He  also  served as co-head of the fi rm’s strategic lead- ership services practice in North America.
Prior to entering the executive search pro- fession,  Mr.  Griesedieck  was  a  group  vice  president  with  Alexander  &  Baldwin,  Inc.,  and spent a number of years with the Falstaff  Brewing Corporation, concluding his tenure  as president and chief operating offi cer and  as a director of this NYSE company.
347  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Latham & Watkins LLP 555 Eleventh Street NW Suite 1000 Washington, DC 20004-1304 Tel +1 202 637 2205 Web www.lw.com  JENNIFER ARCHIE Partner Email jennifer.archie@lw.com Jennifer Archie is a litigation partner in the  Washington, DC, offi ce of Latham & Watkins  with extensive experience investigating and  responding to major cybersecurity and hack- ing  events,  advising  clients  from  emerging  companies  to  global  enterprises  across  all  market  sectors  in  matters  involving  com- puter  fraud  and  cybercrime,  privacy/data  security  compliance  and  program  manage- ment,  advertising  and  marketing  practices,  information  governance,  consumer  fraud,  and trade secrets.
Ms. Archie regularly sup- ports  Latham  &  Watkins’  leading  national  and global M&A, private equity, and capital  markets  practices  in  identifying,  evaluating  and mitigating deal or company privacy and  data security risks.
Co-Chair, Privacy and Background Checks  Practice Group Email pgordon@littler.com Philip  L.  Gordon  chairs  the  Privacy  and  Background Check Practice Group of Littler   ¦  348   Mendelson,  the  nation’s  largest  law  fi rm  representing  only  management  in  employ- ment  law  matters.
He  counsels  employers  on the full range of workplace privacy and  data  protection  issues,  including  back- ground  checks;  monitoring  employees’  electronic  communications;  regulating  employees’  social  media;  developing  “bring-your-own-device”  programs;  com- pliance  with  HIPAA  and  other  federal,  state,  and  international  data  protection  laws;  and  security  incident  preparedness  and  response.
Mr.  Gordon  sits  on  the  Advisory  Board  of  BNA’s  Privacy  and  Security  Law  Report  and  Georgetown  University  Law  Center’s  Cybersecurity  Law  Institute.
Lockton Companies Inc. 1801 K Street, NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20006 Tel +1 202 414 2653 Web www.lockton.com  BEN BEESON Senior Vice President, Cybersecurity  Practice Email bbeeson@lockton.com Ben Beeson advises organizations on how best  to  mitigate  emerging  cyber  risks  to  mission  critical assets that align with the business strat- egy.
As  insurance  continues  to  take  a  greater  role in a comprehensive enterprise cyber risk  management  program,  he  also  designs  and  places customized insurance solutions to fi t an  organization’s specifi c needs.
CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Mr. Beeson is also engaged in the devel- opment  of  Cybersecurity  Policy  in  the  U.S.  and  U.K..
In  March  2015  he  testifi ed  before  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee  on  the  evolving cyber insurance marketplace.
A  frequent  public  speaker,  in April  2015  Mr. Beeson was one of the fi rst panelists to  present  on  the  topic  of  Cyber  Insurance  at  the  world’s  largest  Cyber  Security  Conference, RSA, San Francisco.
Prior  to  moving  to  Washington,  DC,  Mr. Beeson was based in Lockton’s London  office for seven years, where he cofounded  and built one of the leading cybersecurity  teams  within  the  Lloyd’s  of  London  marketplace.
Mr. Beeson holds a BA (Hons) degree in  modern  languages  from  the  University  of  Durham,  U.K.,  and  a  certifi cation  in  Cyber  Security  from  Georgetown  University, Washington, DC.
As  head  of  the  nation’s  largest  member-based  organization  for  board  directors,  Mr.  Daly  is  a  recognized  expert  on  corporate  governance  and  board  transformation.
Prior  to  NACD,  Mr.  Daly  was  an  audit  partner  at  KPMG,  where  he  also  served  as  the  partner-in-charge  of  the  national  risk  management  practice.
He routinely lends his  regulatory  expertise  to  counsel  audit  com- mittees in critical areas, and he has extensive  experience as an auditor and consulting with  companies  in  the  banking  and  insurance  industries.
Mr.  Daly  is  a  frequent  speaker  and  writer  on  many  issues  confronting  today’s corporate board, including executive  compensation.
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP 51 West 52nd Street New York, New York 10019-6142 Tel +1 212 506 5000  ANTONY KIM Partner Email akim@orrick.com Antony Kim is a partner in the Washington,  DC,  offi ce  of  Orrick,  Herrington  &  Sutcliffe  and  serves  as  Global  Co-Chair  of  its  Cybersecurity  and  Data  Privacy  practice.
Mr. Kim represents clients in federal and state  regulatory investigations, private actions, and  crisis-response  engagements  across  an  array  of  cybersecurity,  data  privacy,  sales  and  marketing, and consumer protection matters,  on behalf of private and public companies.
ARAVIND SWAMINATHAN Partner Email aswaminathan@orrick.com Aravind  Swaminathan  is  a  partner  the  Seattle offi ce of Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe  LLP and serves as the Global Co-Chair of its  Cybersecurity  and  Data  Privacy  practice.
Mr.  Swaminathan  advises  clients  in  proac- tive assessment and management of internal     349  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  and external cybersecurity risks, breach inci- dent response planning, and corporate gov- ernance responsibilities related to cybersecu- rity and has directed dozens of data breach  investigations  and  cybersecurity  incident  response  efforts,  including  incidents  with  national  security  implications.
A  former  Cybercrime  Hacking  and  Intellectual  Property  federal  prosecutor,  Mr. Swaminathan also represents companies  and  organizations  facing  cybersecurity  and  privacy-oriented  class  action  litigation  that  can often follow a breach.
Mr. Dunne defends directors and offi cers in  shareholder derivative suits, securities class  actions,  SEC,  and  other  state  and  federal  regulatory matters.
He is a recognized authority on   ¦  350   cyber and physical security matters, focusing  his  practice  on  providing  proactive  liability  mitigation advice to clients.
He  is  a  senior  advisor  to  the  Homeland  Security  and  Defense  Business  Council,  serves on the National Center for Spectator  Sports Safety and Security’s advisory board,  and  is  an  adjunct  professor  at  The  George  Washington University Law School.
Mr. Finch regularly speaks and writes on  security  issues  and  has  written  articles  for  the Wall Street Journal, Politico, The Hill, and  other publications.
Rackspace Inc. 1 Fanatical Place City of Windcrest San Antonio, Texas 78218 Tel +1 860 869 3905 Web www.rackspace.com  BRIAN KELLY Chief Security Offi cer Email brian.kelly@rackspace.com Brian  Kelly  brings  three  decades  of  leader- ship  in  security,  special  operations,  investi- gations and intelligence to Rackspace.
He led teams involved  in  satellite  surveillance,  cybersecurity,  and  special  operations;  as  a  Department  of  Defense  Senior  Service  Fellow,  advised  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  the  Secretary  of  Defense;  and  received  a  Department  of  Defense meritorious service medal.
He  led  the  Giuliani  Advanced  Security  Center  and  served  as        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  executive  director  of  IT  risk  transformation  for Ernst and Young.
Mr. Kelly is the author  of  From  Stone  to  Silicon:  a  Revolution  in  Information  Technology  and  Implications  for  Military Command and Control.
Mr. Kelly holds a degree in management  from  the  U.S. Air  Force Academy,  an  MBA  from  Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  and  an MS degree from the Air Force Institute of  Technology.
Sard Verbinnen & Co 475 Sansome St. #1750 San Francisco, California 94111 Tel +1 415 618 8750 Web www.sardverb.com  SCOTT LINDLAW Principal Email slindlaw@sardverb.com Scott Lindlaw is a Principal at Sard Verbinnen  & Co, a strategic communications fi rm that  helps clients manage overall positioning and  specifi c events affecting reputation and mar- ket  value.
Before  joining  Sard  Verbinnen,  Mr.  Lindlaw  practiced  cybersecurity  and  intellectual  property  law  at the law fi rm Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe  LLP.
In addition to litigating IP cases, several  of which went to trial, he wrote extensively  about  developments  in  data-breach  litiga- tion.
Prior  to  his  legal  career,  Mr.  Lindlaw  was  a  reporter  for  The  Associated  Press,  including  a  four-year  posting  as  an  AP  White  House  correspondent,  covering  President George W. Bush.
Stroz Friedberg LLC 2101 Cedar Springs Rd #1250 Dallas, Texas 75201 Tel: +1 214 377 4556 Web www.strozfriedberg.com  ERIN NEALY COX Executive Managing Director Email enealycox@strozfriedberg.com Erin  Nealy  Cox  is  an  Executive  Managing  Director at Stroz Friedberg, a global leader in  investigations,  intelligence,  and  risk  man- agement.
Ms. Nealy Cox is responsible for the overall  operations  of  the  global  incident  response  group,  including  supervising  fi rst  respond- ers,  threat  intelligence  analysts,  and  mal- ware  specialists.
These  responders  are  deployed to assist corporate clients affected  by  cyberattacks,  state-sponsored  espionage,  and  data  breach  cases  in  sectors,  including  retail,  hospitality,  energy,  biomedical  and  health, and critical infrastructure.
351  ¦  U.S. Department  of Justice Cybersecurity Unit 1301 New York Ave NW Suite 600 Washington, DC 20530 Tel +1 202 514 1026 Web www.justice.gov Email cybersecurity.ccips@usdoj.gov In  December  2014  the  Criminal  Division  created  the  Cybersecurity  Unit  within  the  Computer Crime and Intellectual Property  Section to serve as a central hub for expert  advice  and  legal  guidance  regarding  how  the  criminal  electronic  surveillance  and  computer fraud and abuse statutes impact  cybersecurity.
In pursu- ing  that  goal,  the  unit  is  helping  to  shape  cybersecurity  legislation  to  protect  our  nation’s computer networks and individual  victims  from  cyberattacks.
The  unit  also  engages in extensive outreach to the private  sector  to  promote  lawful  cybersecurity  practices.
His career has centered on  guiding  U.S.  and  multinational  clients  through  complex  international  data  protec- tion  requirements  to  provide  business  solu- tions  that  can  be  implemented  across  large  organizations.
Prior  to  joining  Treliant,  Mr.  Goldstein  was  the  Director  of  International  Data  Privacy  for  Amgen  GmbH  in  Switzerland.
At Amgen, he initiated and led privacy and  data protection efforts across Amgen’s glob- al affi liates, while managing an international  privacy offi ce and a network of data protec- tion offi cers.
He  is  a  Certifi ed  Information  Systems Security Professional (CISSP) and a  Certifi ed  Information  Privacy  Professional  (CIPP–US and Europe).
Mr. Scharf was previ- ously  managing  director  at  One  Equity  Partners,  which  manages  $10  billion  of  investments and commitments for JPMorgan  Chase.
From  2002  through  2004,  he  led  Bank  One’s  consumer  banking  business,  helping  to rebuild the brand, expand the branch and  ATM network, and develop senior talent.
He is cur- rently  on  the  Executive  Council  for  UCSF  Health,  the  Board  of  Trustees  for  Johns  Hopkins  University,  the  Board  of  Directors  for  the  Financial  Services  Roundtable,  and  the Board of Directors for Microsoft Corp.  Wells Fargo & Company 420 Montgomery Street San Francisco, California 94104 Tel +1 800 869 3557 Web www.wellsfargo.com  RICH BAICH Chief Information Security Offi cer Rich Baich is Wells Fargo’s Chief Information  Security Offi cer.
Prior to joining Wells Fargo,  he  was  a  Principal  at  Deloitte  &  Touche,  where  he  led  the  Global  Cyber  Threat  and  Vulnerability Management practice.
Mr. Baich’s  security  leadership  roles  include  retired  Naval  Information  Warfare  Offi cer,  Senior  Director for Professional Services at Network  Associates (now McAfee) and after 9/11, as  Special Assistant to the Deputy Director for  the National Infrastructure Protection Center  (NIPC) at the Federal Bureau of Investigation  (FBI).
He  recently  retired  after  20+  years  of  military service serving in various roles such  as  a  Commander  Information  Operations Directorate at NORAD/Northern  Command  Headquarters;  Commanding  Offi cer Navy Information Operations Center  (NIOC), Denver, Colorado; Special Assistant  at the National Reconnaissance Offi ce (NRO),   the   in     353  ¦  CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Real  Time  Military  Analysis  Center,  the  Reserve  Armed  Forces  Threat  Center,  the  Center  for  Information  Dominance,  and  the  Information  Operations  Technology  Center  (IOTC)  within  the  National  Security  Agency  (NSA).
Mr. Baich was also selected as an advi- sor  for  the  44th  President’s  Commission  on  Cybersecurity.
Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman  & Dicker LLP 55 West Monroe Street Suite 3800 Chicago, Illinois 60603 Tel +1 312 821 6105 Web www.wilsonelser.com  MELISSA VENTRONE Partner Email melissa.ventrone@wilsonelser.com Melissa  Ventrone,  chair  of  Wilson  Elser’s  Data  Privacy  &  Security  practice,  focuses  privacy  breach  response  (pre-  and  post- event), including assisting clients with iden- tifying, evaluating, and managing fi rst- and  third-party  data  privacy  and  security  risks.
She has assisted  numerous clients with identifying and miti- gating  cybersecurity  risks,  including  inci- dent response.
A  member  of  the  Marine  Corps  Reserve  for  more  than  20  years,  she  uses  her  strong  organizational  skills  to  manage  Wilson  Elser’s breach response team, quickly bring- ing lawyers, clients, and forensic and breach  response  vendors  together  to  optimize  response time and effectiveness.
Ms. Ventrone  has  handled  numerous  breaches  for  small  and  large  entities,  including  merchants,  fi nancial institutions, medical providers, and  educational  institutions,  successfully  reduc- ing public and regulatory scrutiny and pro- tecting clients’ reputations.
¦  354   LINDSAY NICKLE Partner Email lindsay.nickle@wilsonelser.com Lindsay  Nickle  is  experienced  in  assisting  clients with the development and implemen- tation  of  risk  management  processes  and  data security measures related to the receipt  and use of confi dential, private, and highly  sensitive  data.
As  part  of  the  fi rm’s  breach  response  team,  Ms.  Nickle  assists  clients  in  developing an effi cient and prompt response  to  the  loss  or  compromise  of  sensitive  and  protected  data.
She  has  assisted  numerous  clients  with  responding  to  data  security  incidents, and she is experienced with stand- ards and issues unique to consumer protec- tion,  as  well  as  the  payment  card  industry.
She also has provided guidance and advice  regarding regulatory compliance within the  fi nancial industry.
Ms. Nickle has extensive  courtroom experience, including successful- ly  handling  more  than  one  hundred  bench  and jury trials.
World Economic Forum  World Economic Forum 91-93 route de la Capite, CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva SWITZERLAND Tel +41 (0) 22 869 1212 Web www.weforum.org  DANIL KERIMI Director, Center for Global Industries Danil Kerimi is currently leading the World  Economic Forum’s work on Internet govern- ance, evidence-based policy-making, digital  economy, and industrial policy.
In addition,  he  manages  Global  Agenda  Council  on  Cybersecurity.
Previously,  Mr.  Kerimi  led        CONTRIBUTOR PROFILES  Forum’s engagement with governments and  business leaders in Europe and Central Asia,  was  in  charge  of  developing  the  Forum’s  global  public  sector  outreach  strategy  on  various  projects  on  cyberspace,  including  cyberresilience, data, digital ecosystem, ICT  and competitiveness, and hyperconnectivity.
Before joining the Forum, Mr. Kerimi worked  with the United Nations Offi ce on Drugs and  Crime/Terrorism  Prevention  Branch,  the  Organization  for  Security  and  Cooperation  in Europe, the International Organization for  Migration,  and  other  international  and  regional organizations.
ELENA KVOCHKO Cyber Security Strategist Elena Kvochko is currently head of global  information  security  strategy  and  imple- mentation  in  the  fi nancial  services  indus- try.
Previously,  she  was  Manager  in  Information Technology Industry at World  Economic  Forum,  where  she  led  global  partnership  programs  on  cyber  resilience  and the Internet of Things and was respon- sible for developing relationships with top  information  technology  industry  partners.
Prior  to  her  position  at  the  Forum,  she  worked as Information and Communication  Technology  specialist  at  the  World  Bank.
Individual Contributor  ROBERT (BOB) F. BRESE Former Chief Information Offi cer, U.S.  Department of Energy Email rfbrese@gmail.com Robert (Bob) F. Brese is a Vice President and  Executive  Partner  with  Gartner,  Inc.,  the  world’s  leading  information  technology  research  and  advisory  company.
Most  recently, Mr. Brese was the Chief Information  Offi cer  (CIO)  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy (DOE), whose national laboratories,  production  facilities,  and  environmental  cleanup  site  missions  span  open  science  to  nuclear security.
Mr.  Brese  also  served  as  the  Department’s  Senior  Agency  Offi cial  for  Privacy  and  for  Information  Sharing  and  Safeguarding.
A  the  U.S.  Government’s cybersecurity community, Mr.  Brese  was  a  key  contributor  the  Administration’s efforts in cyber legislation;  policy;  cybersecurity  technology  research,  development  and  deployment;  and  in  the  cybersecurity  protection  of  the  country’s  critical infrastructure.