Data protection

A practical guide to 
IT security
Ideal for the small business

Under the Data Protection Act, you have 
responsibilities to protect the personal information 
that you and your staff collect and use. This includes 
a requirement to have appropriate security to prevent 
it being accidentally or deliberately compromised.

Breaches of data protection legislation could lead to 
your business incurring a fine – up to £500,000 in 
serious cases. The reputation of your business could 
also be damaged if inadequate security contributes to 
high profile incidents of data loss or theft.

This guide gives advice for small businesses on how 
to keep IT systems safe and secure.

A practical guide to IT security  3

10 practical ways to keep your  
IT systems safe and secure

Keeping your IT systems safe and secure can be a 
complex task and does require time, resource and 
specialist knowledge. If you have personal data within 
your IT system you need to recognise that it may be at 
risk and take appropriate technical measures to secure 
it. The measures you put in place should fit the needs 
of your particular business. They don’t necessarily  
have to be expensive or onerous. They may even be 
free or already available within the IT systems you 
currently have. 
The following practical steps will help you decide how  
to manage the security of the personal data you hold. 

4  Assess the threats and risks to your business

1

Assess the threats and risks  
to your business

Before you can establish what level of security is  
right for your business you will need to review the 
personal data you hold and assess the risks to that 
data. You should consider all processes involved  
that require you to collect, store, use and dispose  
of personal data.
Consider how valuable, sensitive or confidential the 
information is and what damage or distress could be 
caused to individuals if there was a security breach. 
With a clear view of the risks you can begin to choose 
the security measures that are appropriate for your 
needs. The next step is to begin putting them in place.

Get in line with Cyber Essentials  5

Get in line with Cyber Essentials

2

What is the problem?
There is no single product that will provide a  
complete guarantee of security for your business.  
The recommended approach is to use a set of security 
controls that complement each other but will require 
ongoing support in order to maintain an appropriate 
level of security. 

What can I do?
The UK Government’s Cyber Essentials Scheme 
describes the following five key controls for keeping 
information secure. Obtaining a Cyber Essentials 
certificate can provide certain security assurances  
and help protect personal data in your IT systems. 

Boundary firewalls and internet gateways
This will be your first line of defence against an 
intrusion from the internet. A well configured firewall 
can stop breaches happening before they penetrate 
deep into your network. An internet gateway can 
prevent users within your organisation accessing 
websites or other online services that present a  
threat or that you do not trust.  

6  Get in line with Cyber Essentials

2

Secure configuration
Almost all hardware and software will require some 
level of set-up and configuration in order to provide the 
most effective protection. You should remove unused 
software and services from your devices to reduce 
the number of potential vulnerabilities. Older versions 
of some widespread software have well documented 
security vulnerabilities. If you don’t use it, then it is 
much easier to remove it than try to keep it up-to-date.
Make sure you have changed any default passwords 
used by software or hardware – these are well known 
by attackers.

Access control
Restrict access to your system to users and sources you 
trust. Each user must have and use their own username 
and password.
Each user should use an account that has permissions 
appropriate to the job they are carrying out at the time. 
You should also only use administrator accounts  
when strictly necessary (eg for installing known and 
trusted software). 
A brute force password attack is a common method of 
attack, perhaps even by casual users trying to access 
your Wi-Fi so you need to enforce strong passwords, 
limit the number of failed login attempts and enforce 
regular password changes. 
Passwords or other access should be cancelled 
immediately if a staff member leaves the organisation 
or is absent for long periods.

Get in line with Cyber Essentials  7

2

Malware protection
You should have anti-virus or anti-malware products 
regularly scanning your network to prevent or detect 
threats. You will also need to make sure they are kept 
up-to-date and that it is switched on and monitoring  
the files that it should be. You should also make sure 
you receive and act upon any alerts issued by the 
malware protection. 

Patch management and software updates
Computer equipment and software need regular 
maintenance to keep it running smoothly and to fix  
any security vulnerabilities. Security software such as 
anti-virus and anti-malware needs regular updates in 
order to continue to provide adequate protection.
Keep your software up-to-date by checking regularly  
for updates and applying them. Most software can be 
set to update automatically.
If your system is a few years old, you should review  
the protection you have in place to make sure that it  
is still adequate.

8  Secure your data on the move and in the office

3

Secure your data on the move and  
in the office

What is the problem?
The physical security of equipment is important to 
consider as devices containing personal data could be 
stolen in a break-in or lost whilst away from the office. 
You should ensure that personal data on your systems 
is protected against these types of threats. 
You can also prevent or limit the severity of data 
breaches by separating or limiting access between your 
network components. For example, if you can confine 
the processing of personal data to a specific section of 
your network you may be able to reduce the scope of 
the required security measures. 
You also need to ensure that the same level of security 
is applied to personal data on devices being used away 
from the office. Many data breaches arise from the 
theft or loss of a device (eg laptop, mobile phone or 
USB drive) but you should also consider the security 
surrounding any data you send by email or post.
Allowing untrusted devices to connect to your network 
or using work devices on untrusted networks outside 
your office can also put personal data at risk. 

What can I do?
You can increase the physical security of your office 
including storing your servers in a separate room with 
added protection. Back-up devices, CDs and USBs 
should not be left unattended and should be locked 
away when not in use.
You can ensure that personal data is either not on the 
device in the first place or that it has been appropriately 
secured so that it cannot be accessed in the event 

Secure your data on the move and in the office  9

of loss or theft. Good access control systems and 
encryption will help here. 
Encryption is a means of ensuring that data can only 
be accessed by authorised users. Typically, a (strong) 
password is required to ‘unlock’ the data. You can find 
more information on choosing the right encryption on 
our website.
Encryption comes in many different forms and offers 
protection under different circumstances. 
•  Full disk encryption means that all the data on  

the computer is encrypted.

•  File encryption means that individual files can  

be encrypted.

•  Some software offers password protection to stop 
people making changes to the data but this may  
not stop a thief reading the data. Make sure you  
know exactly what protection you are applying to 
your data.

Some mobile devices support a remote disable or  
wipe facility. This allows you to send a signal to a  
lost or stolen device to locate it and, if necessary, 
securely delete all data. Your devices will normally  
need to be pre-registered to use a service like this.
If you permit employees or other users to connect  
their own devices to your network you will be  
increasing the range of security risks and these  
should also be addressed. You can find more 
information about these risks in the ICO’s guidance  
on Bring Your Own Device (BYOD). 

10  Secure your data in the cloud

4

Secure your data in the cloud

What is the problem?
There are a wide range of online services,  
many incorporated within today’s smartphones  
and tablets that require users to transfer data to  
remote computing facilities – commonly known as  
the cloud. 
Processing data in the cloud represents a risk because 
the personal data for which you are responsible will 
leave your network and be processed in those systems 
managed by your cloud provider. You therefore need  
to assess the security measures that the cloud provider 
has in place to ensure that they are appropriate. 

What can I do?
Make sure you know what data is being stored in the 
cloud as modern computing devices, especially those 
targeted at consumers, can have cloud backup or  
sync services switched on by default.
Consider the use of two factor authentication  
especially for remote access to your data in the cloud. 
You can find more information about the use of  
cloud services in the ICO’s Guidance on the use  
of cloud computing.

Back up your data

Back up your data  11

5

What is the problem?
If you were to suffer a disaster such as fire, flood or 
theft you need to be able to get back up and running  
as quickly as possible. Loss of data is also a breach of 
the DPA. 
Malware can also disrupt the availability of access to 
your data. Known as ‘ransomware’ this type of malware 
can encrypt all your data and only provide you with the 
means to decrypt the data after payment of a ransom. 

What can I do?
You need to have a robust data backup strategy in  
place to protect against disasters but also malware, 
such as ransomware. 
Back-ups should not be stored in a way that makes 
them permanently visible to the rest of the network.  
If they are then they can be encrypted by malware or 
the files accidentally deleted. 
At least one of your back-ups should be off-site.   

12  Train your staff

6

Train your staff

What is the problem?
Your employees may have a limited knowledge of cyber 
security but they could be your final line of defence 
against an attack. Accidental disclosure or human error 
is also a leading cause of breaches of personal data. 
This can be caused by simply sending an email to the 
incorrect recipient or opening an email attachment 
containing malware. 

What can I do?
Employees at all levels need to be aware of what 
their roles and responsibilities are. Train your staff to 
recognise threats such as phishing emails and other 
malware or alerting them to the risks involved in 
posting information relating to your business activities 
on social networks. 
You should encourage general security awareness within 
your organisation. A security aware culture is likely to 
identify security risks.
You should also keep your knowledge of threats up-to-
date by reading security bulletins or newsletters from 
organisations relevant to your business.

Keep an eye out for problems

Keep an eye out for problems  13

7

What is the problem?
Cyber criminals or malware can attack your systems 
and go unnoticed for a long time. Many people only find 
out they have been attacked when it is too late even 
though the warning signs were there. 

What can I do?
Check your security software messages, access control 
logs and other reporting systems you have in place on a 
regular basis. You should also act on any alerts that are 
issued by these monitoring services. 
Make sure you can check what software or services are 
running on your network. Make sure you can identify if 
there is something there which should not be.
Run regular vulnerability scans and penetration tests  
to scan your systems for known vulnerabilities –  
make sure you address any vulnerabilities identified.

14  Know what you should be doing

8

Know what you should be doing

What is the problem?
A good policy will enable you to make sure you address 
the risks in a consistent manner. Well written policies 
should integrate well with business processes.
Some organisations do not have adequate levels of 
protection because they are not correctly using the 
security they already have, and are not always able to 
spot when there is a problem. You should also consider 
what actions you should put into place should you suffer 
a data breach. Good incident management can reduce 
the damage and distress caused to individuals. 

What can I do?
Review what personal data you currently have and  
the means of protection you have in place.
Make sure you are compliant with any industry 
guidance or other legal requirements.
Document the controls you have in place and identify 
where you need to make improvements.
Once any improvements are in place, continue to 
monitor the controls and make adjustments  
where necessary.
Consider the risks for each type of personal data  
you hold and how you would manage a data breach. 
This way you can reduce the impact if the worst was  
to happen.
You should also have an acceptable-use policy and 
training materials for staff so that they know their  
data protection responsibilities.

Minimise your data

Minimise your data  15

9

What is the problem?
The DPA says that personal data should be accurate, 
up-to-date and kept for no longer than is necessary. 
Over time you may have collected large amounts of 
personal data. Some of this data may be out-of-date 
and inaccurate or no longer useful. 

What can I do?
Decide if you still need the data. If you do, make sure  
it is stored in the right place.
If you have data you need to keep for archive purposes 
but don’t need to access regularly, move it to a more 
secure location. This will help prevent unauthorised 
access.
If you have data you really no longer need, you should 
delete it. This should be in line with your data retention 
and disposal policies. You might need specialist software 
or assistance to do this securely.

16  Make sure your IT contractor is doing what they should be

10

Make sure your IT contractor is 
doing what they should be

What is the problem?
Many small businesses outsource some or all of their  
IT requirements to a third party. You should be satisfied 
that they are treating your data with at least the same 
level of security as you would. 

What can I do?
Ask for a security audit of the systems containing your 
data. This may help to identify vulnerabilities which 
need to be addressed.
Review copies of the security assessments of your  
IT provider.
If appropriate, visit the premises of your IT provider to 
make sure they are as you would expect.
Check the contracts you have in place. They must be  
in writing and must require your contractor to act only 
on your instructions and comply with certain obligations 
of the DPA
Don’t overlook asset disposal – if you use a contractor 
to erase data and dispose of or recycle your IT 
equipment, make sure they do it adequately. You may 
be held responsible if personal data gathered by you is 
extracted from your old IT equipment when it is resold.

Further reading  17

Further reading

As illustrated by the range of topics covered in this 
guide, keeping an IT network safe and secure can be 
a complex task and does require time, resource and 
specialist knowledge. However, there are a range of 
organisations offering advice and guidance appropriate 
to your business.

Get Safe Online (www.getsafeonline.org)  
A joint initiative between the government,  
law enforcement, leading businesses and the public 
sector to provide computer users and small businesses 
with free, independent, user-friendly advice that will 
allow them to use the internet

Cyber Street (www.cyberstreetwise.com) 
Cyber Street is a cross-government campaign,  
funded by the National Cyber Security Programme,  
and delivered in partnership with the private and 
voluntary sectors. The campaign is led by the Home 
Office, working closely with the Department for 
Business, Innovation and Skills and the Cabinet Office.

Cyber Essentials (www.gov.uk/government/
publications/cyber-essentials-scheme-overview) 
The Cyber Essentials scheme provides businesses 
small and large with clarity on good basic cyber 
security practice. By focusing on basic cyber hygiene, 
your company will be better protected from the most 
common cyber threats. Cyber Essentials is mandatory 
for central government contracts advertised after  
1 October 2014 that involve handling personal 
information and providing certain ICT products 
and services. It has been developed as part of the 
UK’s National Cyber Security Programme in close 
consultation with industry.

18  Further reading

10 Steps to Cyber Security (https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/cyber-risk-management-a-
board-level-responsibility)  
The 10 Steps define and communicate an Information 
Risk Management Regime which can provide protection 
against cyber attacks.

Action Fraud (www.actionfraud.police.uk)  
Action Fraud is the UK’s national reporting centre for 
victims of fraud or financially motivated internet crime. 
Action Fraud records and refers these crimes to the 
police and provides victims with a crime reference 
number, support and advice.

If you would like to contact us please call 0303 123 1113

www.ico.org.uk

Information Commissioner’s Office, 
Wycliffe House, Water Lane, 
Wilmslow, Cheshire, SK9 5AF 

6 January 2016

