DOT HS 812 075      

October 2014 

A Summary of Cybersecurity 
Best Practices

DISCLAIMER

This publication is distributed by the U.S. Department of Transportation, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in the interest of information exchange. 
The opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this publication are those of 
the authors and not necessarily those of the Department of Transportation or the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The United States Government 
assumes no liability for its contents or use thereof. If trade or manufacturers’ names 
or products are mentioned, it is because they are considered essential to the object 
of the publication and should not be construed as an endorsement. The United 
States Government does not endorse products or manufacturers.

Suggested APA Format Citation:

McCarthy, C., Harnett, K., & Carter, A.. (2014, October). A summary of 

cybersecurity best practices. (Report No. DOT HS 812 075). Washington, DC: 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

 

Technical Report Documentation Page 

2. Government Accession No. 
 

1. Report No. 
DOT HS 812 075 
4. Title and Subtitle 
A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Author(s) 
 
Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett, Art Carter 
 
9. Performing Organization Name and Address 
 
Volpe National Transportation Systems Center 
Security and Emergency Management Division 
55 Broad Street 
Cambridge, MA  

3. Recipient’s Catalog No. 
 

 

5. Report Date 
October 2014 
6. Performing Organization 
 
8. Performing Organization 
 
10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS) 
 
11. Contract or Grant No. 
DTNH22-12-V-00085 

 

 

 

 

DTFH61-12-V00021 
13. Type of Report and Period 
Final Report 

14. Sponsoring Agency Code 
 

12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
Office of Program Development and Delivery 
 
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE. 
 
Washington, DC 20590 
 
15. Supplementary Notes 
16. Abstract 
 
 
This report contains the results and analysis of a review of best practices and observations in the 
field of cybersecurity involving electronic control systems across a variety of industry segments 
where the safety-of-life is concerned. This research provides relevant benchmarks that are 
essential to making strategic decisions over the next steps for NHTSA’s research program.  
 
This publication is part of a series of reports that describe our initial work under the goal of 
facilitating cybersecurity best practices in the automotive industry (Goals 1 and 2). The 
information presented herein increase the collective knowledge base in automotive cybersecurity; 
help identify potential knowledge gaps; help describe the risk and threat environments; and help 
support follow-on tasks that could be used to establish security guidelines. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

17. Key Words 
Cybersecurity, NIST, NHTSA, Guidelines, Risk 
Management, Baseline, Use cases, Best 
Practices 

18. Distribution Statement 
Document is available to the public from the 
National Technical Information Service 
www.ntis.gov 

19. Security Classif. (of this report) 
Unclassified 

 

20. Security Classif. (of this page) 
 

21. No. of Pages 
40 

Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72) 

Reproduction of completed page authorized 

22
 
 

 

i 

 

 

Foreword 

 

utomotive Cybersecurity Re
ystems engineering approach, 

search Program 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 

NHTSA’s A
Based on a s
established five research goals to address cybersecurity issues associated with the secure 
operation of motor vehicles equipped with advanced electronic control systems. This program 
covers various safety-critical applications deployed on current generation vehicles, as well as 
those envisioned on future vehicles that may feature more advanced forms of automation and 
connectivity. These goals are: 
 

1.  Build a knowledge base to establish comprehensive research plans for automotive 

cybersecurity and develop enabling tools for applied research in this area; 

2.  Facilitate the implementation of effective, industry-based best practices and voluntary 

standards for cybersecurity and cybersecurity information-sharing forums; 

3.  Foster the development of new system solutions for automotive cybersecurity; 
4.  Research the feasibility of developing minimum performance requirements for 

automotive cybersecurity; and 

5.  Gather foundational research data and facts to inform potential future Federal policy and 

regulatory decision activities. 

 

This report 
This report contains the results and analysis of a review of best practices and observations in the 
field of cybersecurity involving electronic control systems across a variety of industry segments. 
This research provides relevant benchmarks that are informative to making strategic decisions 
for NHTSA’s research program.  
 
This publication is part of a series of reports that describe our initial work under the goal of 
facilitating cybersecurity best practices in the automotive industry (Goals 1 and 2). The 
information presented herein increase the collective knowledge base in automotive 
cybersecurity; help identify potential knowledge gaps; help describe the risk and threat 
environments; and help support follow-on tasks that could be used to establish security 
guidelines. 

ii 

 

 

Table of Contents 

Executive Summary .............................................................................................................................. 1 
1 
Background ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Cybersecurity Research Methodology .............................................................................................. 1 
1.2 
Findings............................................................................................................................................. 2 
1.3 
Study Findings ...................................................................................................................................... 4 
2 
Background ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 
Cybersecurity Research Methodology .............................................................................................. 4 
2.2 
Industries Studied .......................................................................................................................... 4 
2.2.1 
Findings............................................................................................................................................. 6 
2.3 
Information Technology and Telecommunications ...................................................................... 6 
2.3.1 
Aviation......................................................................................................................................... 9 
2.3.2 
Industrial Control Systems, Energy, and NIST ........................................................................... 12 
2.3.3 
2.3.4 
Financial Payments ..................................................................................................................... 18 
2.3.5  Medical Devices .......................................................................................................................... 22 
Automotive ................................................................................................................................. 25 
2.3.6 
2.4 
Request for Information .................................................................................................................. 27 
Challenges and Issues ..................................................................................................................... 28 
2.5 
Observations ................................................................................................................................... 28 
2.6 
2.7 
References ....................................................................................................................................... 34 
 

iii 

 

 

 

1  Executive Summary 
1.1 Background 
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration performed a review of cybersecurity best practices 
and lessons learned in the area of safety-critical electronic control systems. This review was across a 
variety of industries in which electronic control systems are used in applications where breaches in 
cybersecurity could impinge on critical control functions and therefore could jeopardize safety of life.  

1.2 Cybersecurity Research Methodology 
This research targeted cybersecurity best practices used in non-transportation industries and in other 
transportation modes. It was important to summarize from the experience (both successes and failures) of 
government and private sector professionals who have been developing cybersecurity strategies, policies, 
and approaches. By looking outside the automobile industry, and indeed outside the transportation 
industry itself, the goal was to understand the potential key elements of a cybersecurity program. 

The focus of the research was to examine industries with commonalities to the auto industry with respect 
to cybersecurity, and to study the state of these industries’ efforts to understand their cybersecurity issues 
and how they are improving their cybersecurity posture. The specific objectives were to bring forward 
key observations to help NHTSA craft a strategic roadmap for cybersecurity. 

Government and industries studied were: 

Information technology and telecommunications, 
Industrial control systems and energy, 

• 
• 
•  Medical devices, 
•  Aviation, 
•  Financial payments, and 
•  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 

 

Research consisted of three steps:  

1.  Literature study of relevant cybersecurity research, guidelines, best practices, and standards in 

target industries; 

2.  Issuance of a Request for Information (RFI) to obtain informed views on the perceived needs, 

prevailing practices, and lessons learned concerning the cybersecurity and safety of safety-critical 
electronic control systems used in various modes of transportation and other industry sectors; and 

3.  Interviews with subject matter experts (SME).  

 

1 

 

 
1.3 Findings 
The information technology (IT) industry is a good model for cybersecurity protection based on its 
experience, exposure to, and addressing of issues. The telecommunications industry helped accelerate the 
advancement of hacking activities and exposing key systems (hardware and software) by advancing 
networking and enabling the development of the Internet. 

The IT security industry developed best practices over the years that include the basic tenet that 
information security is a life-cycle process.  

While all the elements of a Life-Cycle Risk Management Program are important, perhaps the most vital 
element of any cybersecurity program is to perform risk assessments on all systems, sub-systems, and 
devices to determine what vulnerabilities are present.  

It is important that the risk analyses identify and quantify the consequences of risks. A very effective 
methodology for risk assessment is the development of use case scenarios. Proper cybersecurity threat 
modeling can help create a better and more effective risk mitigation plan through: 

•  Emphasis on asset management and risk reduction before acquisition of information and security 

technologies; 

•  Selection of correct countermeasures; and  
• 

Justification of investments in security, compliance and risk management.  

Individual industries examine the best practices of this life-cycle approach and create industry-specific 
security guidelines that address the need for robust risk management that includes the assessment, design, 
implementation, and operation phases of critical systems. 

The research of the various industries studied has yielded some example best practices, shown in the 
following table. 

Key Observation 

Cybersecurity is a life-cycle process that includes elements of assessment, 
design, implementation, and operations as well as an effective testing and 
certification program 
The aviation industry has many parallels to the automotive industry in the 
area of cybersecurity 
Strong leadership from the Federal Government could help the development 
of industry-specific cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and best practices 
Ongoing shared learning with other Federal Government agencies is 
beneficial 
Use of the NIST cybersecurity standards as a baseline is a way to accelerate 
development of industry-specific cybersecurity guidelines 
International cybersecurity efforts are a key source of information 
Consider developing a cybersecurity simulator. It could facilitate 
identification of vulnerabilities and risk mitigation strategies and can be 
used for collaborative learning (government, academia, private sector, 

2 

Source 

All 

FAA 

FAA 

FAA, NRC, NIST 

FAA, NIST, NRC, 
Automotive 
Automotive, Aviation 
FAA 

 
international) 
Cybersecurity standards for the entire supply chain are important 

Foster industry cybersecurity groups for exchange of cybersecurity 
information 
Use professional capacity building to address develop cybersecurity skillsets 
system designers and engineers 
Connected vehicle security should be end-to-end; vehicles, infrastructure, 
and V2X communication should all be secure. 
 

 

Automotive, Financial 
Payments 
IT, DHS, NIST 

All  

Aviation, Automotive 
(EVITA) 

Mapping these key observations to the process of a lifecycle information security program yields the 
stages in which each falls. This is shown in the figure below.  

 

3 

 

 

2  Study Findings 
2.1 Background 
NHTSA performed a review of cybersecurity best practices and lessons learned in the area of safety-
critical electronic control systems. This review was across a variety of industries in which electronic 
control systems are used in applications where breaches in cybersecurity could impinge on critical control 
functions and therefore could jeopardize safety of life. 

2.2 Cybersecurity Research Methodology 
The research targeted cybersecurity best practices used in non-transportation industries and in other 
transportation modes. It was important to summarize from the experience (both successes and failures) of 
government and private sector professionals who have been developing cybersecurity strategies, policies, 
and approaches. By looking outside the automobile industry, and outside the transportation industry itself, 
the goal is to understand the potential key elements of a cybersecurity program. 

The focus of the research was to examine industries with commonalities to the auto industry with respect 
to cybersecurity, and to study the state of these industries’ efforts understanding their cybersecurity issues 
and how they are improving their cybersecurity posture.  

Industries for the study were determined by examining, at a high level, whether industries have similar 
concerns, risks, and constraints to that of the automobile industry; either similarity of the industry’s use 
case or common issues or problem areas with respect to cybersecurity.  

The research was performed in several steps. The first step entailed a literature study of relevant 
cybersecurity research, standards, guidelines, and best practices as well as forward-looking examinations 
of the growing need for cybersecurity in the use of information technology and wireless communications 
in cyber-physical (and especially safety-critical) systems. 

Step two was the issuance of a Request For Information (RFI) to obtain informed views on the perceived 
needs, prevailing practices, and lessons learned concerning the cybersecurity and safety of safety-critical 
electronic control systems used in various modes of transportation and other industry sectors.i 

This RFI yielded 13 responses from a cross section of private sector companies, industry consortia, and 
standards development organizations.  

The third and final research step was to interview subject matter experts. The SMEs were chosen by 
examining the findings of the literature study and RFI, as well as through interactions with members of 
industry. 

2.2.1 Industries Studied  
Table 1 summarizes the industries studied and the rationale for their inclusion. 

4 

Table 1: Industries Studied and Why 

 

Why Studied 
The IT industry has developed some of the more current best practices for 
addressing cybersecurity. 
IT Systems (and now cyber-physical systems, including control systems on 
automobiles) are connected through various wired and wireless communications 
protocols. The Internet, cloud computing, etc. has led to: 

Increased threat vectors of the hacking community, and 

• 
•  More sophisticated hacking (online shared tools and hacking social 

networks, etc.).  

“Aircraft-airspace” is very similar to “vehicle-roadway” and the advent of 
NextGen parallels the vehicle-to-vehicle program somewhat. Additionally, 
eEnabled aircraft mirror today’s vehicles. 
FAA has been working on security issues for several years. 
Operational systems have been migrated using IT and mesh communications1 but 
security is only now being addressed. 

Infrastructure (networks/devices) often located in public spaces 

• 
•  Department of Homeland Security (ICS) and Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission/Nuclear Regulatory Commission (energy sector) have been 
addressing the security issue for some time 

NIST is a Federal Government Standards Development Organization. 
Federal Information Processing Publication 199 Standards for Security 
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems (FIPS 199) and 
NIST Special Publication 800 Series provide the baseline for Federal 
cybersecurity best practices, as well as a foundation for industry-specific security 
guidelines. 
A highly distributed risk (merchants, online storefronts, etc.) in the financial 
payments industry drives requirements to secure networks outside of the card 
issuers’ purview. 
This includes the safety of life devices and systems. The industry requires a high 
degree of protecting individual privacy. 
Cybersecurity work is beginning in the U.S. marketplace. That work is 
leveraging international work. SAE International created the Vehicle Electrical 
System Security Committee. This group is gaining insight into the state of the 
industry with respect to cybersecurity. 

 

Industry Studied 
Information 
Technology 
Telecommunications 

Aviation 

Industrial Control 
Systems and Energy 
 

National Institute of 
Standards and 
Technology 

Financial Payments 
 

Medical Devices 
 
Automobile 

These industries were studied using the three-step method discussed above. An initial literature research 
gave a general sense of each industry’s cybersecurity issues and the methodologies used to address them.  

No industry studied had a “solution” to cybersecurity. Rather, issues were actively being worked and 
methodologies being developed along the lines of what could generically be called the best practices of 
cybersecurity. These best practices are not, as might be assumed, technical fixes to observed 
vulnerabilities. Rather, the foundation of a cybersecurity program entails an iterative cybersecurity 
process over the entire life cycle of systems, sub-systems, software applications, or devices/hardware. 
                                                           
1 Mesh Communications is a type of communications network topology where each node in the network must not only capture 
and disseminate its own data, but also serve as a relay for other nodes, that is, it must collaborate to propagate the data in the 
network. 

5 

 

 
2.3 Findings 
2.3.1 Information Technology and Telecommunications 
The IT industry is has the most experience with cybersecurity issues. Initially academia turned to hacking 
into systems to do backdoor patching and testing, and more creatively for things such as making free 
telephone calls. Techniques and motives rapidly evolved as the IT world itself exponentially grew. Rapid 
development and evolution of telecommunications fed this exponential growth. 

Telecommunications has based the entirety of its industry on the technologies, standards, services, and 
infrastructure established by IT. The telecommunications industry has been and continues to be coupled 
with that IT foundation to expand and facilitate services enabling the exchange of digital information. The 
business and technical issues of telecommunication are a very close parallel to the IT industry as a whole. 
The key differentiation is that telecommunications is the enabling set of services that enlist IT technology 
to provide services to all the industries that we are investigating.  

This is an important factor to consider since wireless services are used for services relevant to the 
automotive industry such as toll collection systems, automated crash notification (ACN), vehicle-to-
vehicle exchanges, and infotainment systems. This industry is what has enabled all the backroom 
operation services to be possible, and has delivered the conveyer of data asset exchange services in use 
today - the Internet. Telecommunications and the Internet have allowed hackers to form online 
communities to exchange ideas, tips, and hacking tools with targets being data.  

Given these realities, the IT industry developed cybersecurity best practices over the years that include the 
basic tenet that Information Security is a life cycle process. Figure 1 shows the Information Security 
Program as an iterative life cycle. 

Figure 1: Information Security Life Cycle 

 

6 

 
While all the elements of the Life Cycle Risk Management Program are important, perhaps the most vital 
element of any cybersecurity program is to perform risk assessments on all systems, sub-systems, and 
devices to determine what vulnerabilities are present. This process is important for organizations as it is 
used to discover and categorize the security issues in their systems. It is also important that risk analyses 
identify and quantify the consequences of risk factors in applicable use case scenarios. Risk Assessment 
helps create a better and more effective risk mitigation plan because it: 

 

•  Emphasizes the focus on asset management and risk reduction before acquisition of information 

and security technologies. 
Is instrumental in selecting the right countermeasures often prioritizing monitoring before active 
data loss prevention (as an example) 
Justifies investments in security, compliance, and risk management  

• 

• 

Detailed breakdowns of the Information Security Lifecycle elements are shown in Table 2 below.  

Table 2: Details of the Information Security Life Cycle Process 

Assessment Phase 
Establishing a Security 
Policy 

System Security 
Evaluation 

Iterative Risk 
Assessment 

Design Phase 
System Prioritization 

Security Architecture 

 

 

A security policy includes administrative requirements and procedures in all 
the areas detailed below. Cybersecurity is beginning to be viewed as a need 
throughout organizations, not just in the IT area. Therefore there is a 
realization that cybersecurity should be championed not by the chief 
information officer, but rather the chief executive officer. All functional 
areas in an organization, from operations to human resources to IT, should 
play an active role in developing a robust security policy. 
Systems should be examined and evaluated for their security needs using 
established standards and best practices throughout their life cycle to 
uncover potential vulnerabilities. A sample standard document is the FIPS 
199 Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and 
Information Systems. 
Risks are measured through evaluation of the probability of the vulnerability 
being exploited as well as the severity to the system, organization, public, 
etc. if the system is compromised. A best practice document in this area for 
Federal IT Systems is the NIST SP 800.37 Guide for Applying the Risk 
Management Framework to Federal Information Systems: A Security Life 
Cycle Approach. 

Once the risks have been identified and rated, they must be prioritized 
based on the organization’s ability to apply appropriate resources (funding, 
technical skill sets, etc.) to address them in the most efficient manner.  
Examination of a system’s security architecture is the final piece to the 
assessment of system security and the beginning of addressing 
vulnerabilities identified in the assessment phase.  

7 

 

 
 

Table 2: Details of the Information Security Lifecycle Process (Continued) 

 

Implementation Phase 
Remediation and 
Implementation 

Security Test and 
Evaluation 

Operation Phase 
Awareness and 
Security Training 

Intrusion Detection 
and Response 

Now that vulnerabilities have been identified, rated, and a security 
architecture developed, the findings should be implemented with 
appropriate security controls. Included in the implementation is a process 
for identifying the remediation of the fallout from potential exploitations of 
vulnerabilities. The Federal government guideline for developing the 
implementation and remediation plan is the NIST SP 800.53B Recommended 
Security Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations.  
A robust conformance testing and certification plan is vital to ensuring that 
appropriate security controls are compliant with security performance 
specifications. Once security controls have been applied and implemented in 
field systems, it is vital to continuously monitor the systems to ensure that 
any new vulnerabilities are identified and circumvented. An example of a 
best practice identified for this phase is FAA, which uses the Airborne 
Network Simulator System (ANSS) to attempt to exploit vulnerabilities in a 
controlled environment and evaluate potential consequences; so-called 
“white hat” hacking is intended to improve security measures. 
 
Once fielded systems are in operation comes the need for ongoing training 
both to raise the awareness of the entire workforce of information security, 
but also to train specific users of systems in their appropriate, secure use. 
Often shortcuts are taken in the day-to-day operations of systems to save 
time and avoid procedures that users may deem “tedious” but are a vital 
means to keeping a strong system security posture.  
The final phase is the ongoing monitoring of systems to identify attempted 
and successful exploitation of vulnerabilities. This constant monitoring is 
important in that it may yield vulnerabilities or attack vectors not previously 
thought of in the design and assessment phases.  

 

8 

 

 

 

2.3.2 Aviation 
Developing “eEnabled” Aircraft 
About a decade ago, the potential for cybersecurity issues in new commercial aircraft and in the systems 
that communicate wirelessly between aircraft, airport ground equipment, and flight control systems began 
to emerge. Aircraft OEMs were developing “eEnabled technologies” that they were increasingly 
deploying into aircraft. The definition of eEnabled is any “device, system or combination of 
devices/components and systems that communicate with technologies other than point-to-point including 
interfaces between aircraft components and interfaces between aircraft and off-aircraft entities.” 
Examples of eEnabled technologies include electronic flight bags (EFBs), WANs, cellular, Wi-Fi – 
802.11b/g, and ethernet.  

Legacy aircraft (e.g., B737, A320) have limited connections with external networks such as EFBs, 
Gatelink, and wireless LANs. However, eEnabled aircraft (e.g., B787, B747-8, A380, Bombardier C-
Series) have many new and integrated external network connections (e.g., software data loading, 
broadband 802.11 connections, etc.) with airlines, airports, aircraft manufacturers, air navigation service 
providers, and repair organizations. The introduction of eEnabled technologies into new commercial 
aircraft is leading to unprecedented global connectivity that creates a new environment for the aviation 
sector. Aircraft navigation and communication functions are transitioning from operating as isolated and 
independent systems, to being integrated into a networked system that is dependent on exchanging digital 
information between the eEnabled aircraft and external networks located on the ground and on other 
eEnabled aircraft. 

Due to the proliferation of these new connective technologies, it became necessary to re-examine security 
and safety of the aircraft to protect it against unwanted cyber intrusion. It would be essential to include 
cybersecurity within the certification criteria and processes.  

Additionally, the cybersecurity approach of the new eEnabled aircraft should be coordinated with the 
move toward the Next Generation Air Traffic Control (NextGen) system. NextGen will evolve from a 
ground-based system of air traffic control to a satellite-based system of air traffic management which 
includes enhanced use of GPS and weather systems, as well as enhanced data networking and the use of 
digital communications. Security architectures and information sharing will be a vital element of this 
highly connected system, ensuring all system elements maintain appropriate levels of trust. This highly 
connected NextGen environment parallels the move toward Connected Vehicle systems and applications 
where automobiles and infrastructure will be connected.  

9 

 

 
 

Standards-Setting Efforts 
In 2007, FAA engaged the Volpe Center to research and evaluate the requirements for airborne network 
security to ensure aircraft safety. The study required robust involvement from other government agencies 
(e.g., DHS and DoD), aircraft OEMs, suppliers, and academia. Because the cybersecurity of aircraft 
should be an international effort, the government of the United Kingdom was also involved. Activities of 
this study are delineated below.  

Also in 2007, FAA helped lead the development of a standards development group in the Radio Technical 
Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA). This group (SC-216) developed the “Security Assurance and 
Assessment Processes for Safety-related Aircraft Systems” (DO-326). Published in December 2010, this 
“process” document is intended to augment current guidance for aircraft certification to handle the 
information security threat. It addresses only aircraft type certification but is intended as the first of a 
series of documents on aeronautical systems security that together will address information security for 
the overall Aeronautical Information System Security (AISS) of airborne systems with related ground 
systems and environment.  

FAA has also staffed an internal national cybersecurity team to work on developing a standardized 
approach to address the cybersecurity vulnerabilities of aircraft equipment being installed during type 
certification, amended type certification, supplemental type certification, and field approval projects 
throughout the Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service. 

Future work activities by the RTCA SC-216 group include examination and update of the FAA 
Instructions for Continued Airworthiness Order to address operational cybersecurity guidance for airline 
and maintenance repair organizations for eEnabled aircraft. 
 

Cybersecurity Simulation Laboratory 
In order to gain hands-on understanding and experience regarding how the various eEnabled components 
were integrated and what cybersecurity vulnerabilities may be present, FAA engaged the Volpe Center 
and Wichita State University (WSU) to develop the Airborne Network Security Simulator (ANSS). The 
goals for ANSS are to: 
 

• 

Identify potential information security threats in a synthetic environment by simulating next 
generation aircraft communications systems; 

•  Share knowledge, tools, and methodologies with academia and other interested stakeholders to 

extend research value; 

•  Act as a coordinating authority for cybersecurity risk mitigation within the international 

aerospace & aviation community; 

•  Recommend appropriate technical & procedural standards for security risks to aid in the 

• 

development of regulatory guidelines and policies; and 
Influence industry bodies on cybersecurity best practice with respect to specifications, 
procedures, and recommendations used by the industry. 

10 

 
Through these various activities, FAA has identified the following key areas requiring security controls. 

 

•  Electronic flight bags (EFBs) 
•  Gatelink 
•  Cellular  
•  Field loadable software 
•  User modifiable software 
•  Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) equipment 
• 
• 
•  Wireless servers/routers  
•  Aviation sensors 

Integrated modular avionics 
Internal/external connectivity  

 

 

 

Aircraft Certification Process and Issues 
One of the key issues in the cybersecurity challenge for FAA is that, at this time, aircraft are not fully 
integrated with all of the eEnabled technologies and systems. This creates a difficult Type Certification 
(TC) and Supplemental Type Certification (STC) problem with respect to cybersecurity.  
 
A different set of challenges may emerge as many of the legacy aircraft may be retrofitted with newer 
avionics as required to operate in a NextGen (U.S.) or Single European Sky ATM Research, SESAR 
(Europe) operational environment. Even older legacy aircraft will need to consider the importance of 
cybersecurity. Many scheduled for retrofit with the newer technology are subject to the same 
cybersecurity threats. This also increases complexity to the STC process by requiring a new security 
baseline for each aircraft model and subtype configuration. 
 
The challenge will be how to properly mitigate and manage the installation and use of newer IP-enabled 
external networks, onto a legacy aircraft that was not originally designed to provide such capabilities. 
While the existing backplane has fewer capabilities for an external access to any part of the aircraft, 
previously isolated systems were never designed to protect or manage themselves while operating with 
some of the newer external access methods (SATCOM, wireless networks, etc.). 
 

eEnabled Aircraft Technology Survey 
In 2010, FAA and Volpe Center conducted a survey of aircraft OEMs, supply chain vendors, type 
certification inspection (DERs), and government/military organizations. The goal of the study was to 
gather information to be used to aid in future FAA planning related to regulations, directives, standards, 
guidance, training, and research regarding aircraft network security.  
 
The survey results showed that the vast majority of respondents had aggressive plans for developing and 
adding eEnabled technologies into airframes: 63 percent of organizations planned to include eEnabled 
technologies and within three to five years and that number would grow to 83 percent. The inclusion of 
these technologies is a logical business decision for the aircraft manufacturers and the airlines. The 
business rationale includes: 

11 

 

 

1.  Weight savings: no/less copper + less paper (i.e. EFBs) = fuel savings; 
2.  Reduced labor cost: for example, aircraft that are IP addressable allow mechanics remote access 

to the aircraft to perform maintenance; and 

3.  In-flight entertainment: provides a feature-rich environment for travelers and a revenue generator 

for airlines. 

Supplemental Type Certification involving the incorporation of eEnabled technologies on legacy aircraft 
as well as the need to type certify new aircraft that are eEnabled will be a major workload for FAA in the 
next few years. Additionally, the survey findings show the need for eEnabled certification will expand by 
63 to 83 percent over the next 5 years. This will influence FAA in the following areas: 

1.  FAA workload increases and workforce cybersecurity training increases; 
2.  OEM workload increases and workforce cybersecurity training increases; 
3.  Airline workload increases and workforce cybersecurity training increases; 
4.  Need for additional policy and rulemaking; and 
5.  Supply chain issues- need to ensure cybersecurity requirements are communicated and met by 

sub-tier vendors. 

2.3.3 Industrial Control Systems, Energy, and NIST 
Connection between Industrial Control Systems, Energy, and NIST research 
The ICS and energy sectors have been combined in this study due to the many similarities in the 
industries. In fact, ICS is not so much an industry as a type of system that is present in many industries. 
“Industrial Control Systems” is really a generic term that encompasses systems used to control industrial 
production, including Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. However, the term is 
becoming more general and can be applied to systems that control operational activities. These control 
systems form a base for many infrastructures in industries including the energy sector. Therefore, the 
study of the energy sector paralleled the study of ICS. 

NIST was combined with ICS and the energy sector since NIST creates many of the standards, guidelines, 
and best practices that are used for security standards for operational systems in each sector.  

ICS can be used in the energy sector for controlling generation plant operations as well as to control the 
function of the power distribution network. The hallmark of ICS is that they are formerly closed and often 
proprietary systems that are electro-mechanical (cyber-physical systems) in nature. It is in this latter area 
that the research has concentrated in the energy sector due to the move toward Smart Grid. 

ICS Research 
Over the years, ICS has been increasingly enhanced with information technology hardware and 
software as well as increasingly connected via the Internet through a mesh network of wired and 
wireless communications. This migration has evolved ICS into distributed IT systems designed 
to enhance the operations of these formerly closed systems. While this migration has enhanced 
the performance of these systems, it has also introduced vulnerabilities.  
 

12 

 

 
A key standards document used in ICS is the NIST Special Publication 800.82 Guide to 
Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security - Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) 
systems, Distributed Control Systems (DCS), and other control system configurations such as 
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC). This document is based on other NIST SP800 series 
documents but is specifically tailored for use in ICS and its unique use cases. 
 
The Department of Homeland Security’s Control Systems Security Program (CSSP) was created to 
examine vulnerabilities of these systems within the Nation’s 18 Critical Infrastructure and Key Resource 
(CIKR) Sectors. Among these sectors are transportation, energy, and nuclear reactors, materials, and 
waste.  

The DHS CSSP website, www.us-cert.gov/control_systems/index.html, is a key resource for 
background documents, tools, and best practices. In addition to connecting users with various best 
practices such as NIST standards and NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIRs), the CSSP 
connects ICS professionals and organizations with the ICS Cyber Emergency Response Team (CERT). A 
CERT is a key element in any industry cybersecurity program.  

The Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University developed the first CERT. In 2003, 
DHS collaborated with the institute to create the US-CERT, www.us-cert.gov/index.html.  US-CERT 
acts as a resource for cybersecurity professionals to highlight cybersecurity incidents and provide support 
for incident response and forensic analysis as well as acts as a conduit for topical cybersecurity 
information. US-CERT has a robust warehouse of information products and alerts that are both technical 
and non-technical in nature. While US-CERT has widespread security information covering all IT 
security, the ICS CERT tailors its activities to the ICS world. 

In addition to informational products and tools, the ICS CSSP provides hands on training- ranging from 
half-day awareness training to a one week technical course of study at the Idaho National Laboratory, as 
well as on-site resources to work one-on-one with operators to perform assessments of their systems.  

DHS CSSP is also active in the support and facilitation of an ICS industry Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center (ISAC). ISACs are extremely valuable, cross-industry organizations that act as 
clearinghouses for information on cyber and physical threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions. They help 
members better understand their threats and vulnerabilities and are forums for anonymous submission 
regarding specific vulnerabilities and security breaches. Much more information on ISACs is available 
through the National Council of ISACs at www.isaccouncil.org/.  

Another key element of ICS support is the ICS Joint Working Group (ICSJWG), which is a cross-industry 
group that includes the public and private sectors as well as academia, focused on reducing the risk to the 
nation’s industrial control systems through information sharing throughout the 18 CIKRs. The ICSJWG 
facilitates cybersecurity knowledge sharing and provides tools, tips, and other informational products as 
well as administers a semi-annual conference to bring security professionals together.  

Examining the ICS world beyond the involvement of DHS, there is a building understanding that control 
systems are no longer isolated, and therefore are no longer safe from the exploit of vulnerabilities. 

The overarching key approaches in the ICS industry are: 

13 

•  Proactive involvement of the Federal Government through DHS CSSP; 
•  Promotion of NIST standards, guidelines, and best practices; 
•  The establishment and active use of a CERT (government-sponsored) and an ISAC (industry 

• 

consortium); and 
Industry outreach and training through exhaustive archives of informational products online and 
the management of the ICSJWG. 

 

 

 

Energy (SmartGrid) Research 
The electric power grid is evolving into a “smart grid” because of the demand for a more efficient and 
complex system that will allow the participants more control. The increase in complexity of the grid also 
increases the number of potential vulnerabilities in the system. These potential vulnerabilities to one of 
the United States’ most vital national infrastructures led to the passing of the Energy and Independence 
Security Act (EISA) of 2007.  

EISA assigns roles and responsibilities for various members of the Federal Government and the electric 
utilities industry and created two key organizations. The first is the Smart Grid Advisory Committee 
(SGAC), which is made up of private sector industry members. The mission of the SGAC is to “provide 
input to NIST on the Smart Grid standards, priorities and gaps, and on the overall direction, status and 
health of the Smart Grid implementation by the Smart Grid industry including identification of issues and 
needs and the Smart Grid Task Force” that consists of several Federal Government agencies. See 
www.nist.gov/smartgrid/committee.cfm.  

The second group established by EISA is the Smart Grid Task Force, which is made up of 11 Federal 
agencies. The mission of the Task Force is to “ensure awareness, coordination and integration of the 
diverse activities of the Federal Government related to smart grid technologies, practices, and services.”  
See www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/smart-grid.asp.  

Specific organizations called out by EISA are the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and 
NIST. FERC was earlier given authority to oversee the power grid when Congress passed the Energy 
Policy Act of 2005. EISA further tasks FERC “to adopt interoperability standards and protocols necessary 
to ensure smart-grid functionality and interoperability in the interstate transmission of electric power and 
in regional and wholesale electricity markets.” See www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-
act/smart-grid.asp.  

NIST was charged with developing guidelines on how to securely implement the smart grid systems. 
NIST states its goal in this work as “bringing together manufacturers, consumers, energy providers, and 
regulators to develop ‘Interoperable standards’." See www.nist.gov/smartgrid/nistandsmartgrid.cfm.  

NIST staffed its Smart Grid cybersecurity discipline area in order to facilitate the development of 
standards, guidelines, and best practices by members of the entire electric utilities industry. It should be 
noted however, that this level of activity on the part of NIST─ the creation of a SmartGrid standards 
working area led by a NIST Project Manager─ is not the norm. The reason for this level of activity is the 
mandate by EISA. When specifically asked how NHTSA may engage NIST in the creation of a similar 

14 

 
work are for electronic resiliency of automobiles, the NIST subject matter experts stated that they would 
do such a thing only if tasked by law. Therefore, this level of facilitation and leadership by NIST is not 
practical. 

 

 

NIST Standards Developed 
NIST has been a very active and successful steward of the development of standards for Smart Grid. 
Perhaps most noteworthy is the publication in August 2010 of NISTIR 7628 Guidelines for Smart Grid 
Cybersecurity. Volume 1 covers the Smart Grid Cybersecurity Strategy, Architecture, and High-Level 
Requirements. This is a valuable guideline document for how to examine security in the Smart Grid, but 
may be equally useful as a baseline to follow for the automotive industry. 

NISTIR 7628 Vol. 1 covers the following stages of the security approach. 

1.  Selection of Use Cases with Cybersecurity Considerations 
2.  Performance of a Risk Assessment 
3.  Setting Boundaries: The Beginnings of a Security Architecture 
4.  High Level Security Requirements 
5.  Smart Grid Conformity Testing and Certification 

These are the same basic steps in the life cycle approach to information security discussed previously. 
This is not surprising since listed standards references include FIPS 199 and several of the NIST SP 800 
series documents. 

Other NIST accomplishments thus far include the identification of 75 initial standards—uniform ways of 
doing business that should be considered to make an interoperable, secure Smart Grid a reality. 
Additionally NIST has identified five "foundational standards" for consideration by federal and state 
regulators. The standards describe common data communications formats that would allow Smart Grid 
devices and networks to work seamlessly and that specify cybersecurity protocols. 

The basic finding in the examination of Smart Grid is that development of standards, guidelines and best 
practices have been based on establishing the use of existing standards as baselines, then modifying them 
for the specific needs of Smart Grid. Armed with a basic set of guidelines individual vendors or operators 
can then craft technical solutions to meet minimum security requirements developed collaboratively, but 
led strongly by the Federal Government and industry regulators. 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
In the course of research efforts, the opportunity arose to learn about the inroads that the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission (NRC) has undertaken regarding cybersecurity. The mission of the NRC is to 
enable the nation to safely use radioactive materials for beneficial civilian purposes while ensuring that 
people and the environment are protected. The NRC regulates commercial nuclear power plants and other 
uses of nuclear materials, such as in nuclear medicine, through licensing, inspection and enforcement of 
its requirements. See www.nrc.gov/about-nrc.html.  

15 

 
NRC has a very strict compliance infrastructure by nature of its mission. NRC’s master regulatory 
guidance comes from Chapter 1 of Title 10, "Energy," of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Chapter 
1 is divided into Parts 1 through 199. NRC’s regulatory practice is highlighted in Figure 2. 

 

Figure 2: NRC Regulatory Program 

 

 

Cybersecurity Activities 
Much investment in time and resources has been made by the NRC to ensure that developers, operators, 
and maintainers of nuclear power facilities establish a cybersecurity program, and submit a plan to show 
compliance. The current key guideline they have put out to nuclear materials operators on cybersecurity is 
NRC RG 5.71, which currently in its Draft Final Rule. It spells out the requirements for a cybersecurity 
plan to be submitted by the licensees for the NRC’s review and approval. The licensee is required to 
“provide high assurance that digital computer and communication systems and networks are adequately 
protected against cyber-attacks, up to and including the design basis threat as described in Title 10 of the 
Code of Federal regulations (10CFR) Part73, Section 73.1.” 

The provisions in RG 5.71 require protection of all critical systems and networks and require 
implementation of controls that will defend these systems against any cyber-attack that would adversely 
affect the availability, integrity and confidentiality of the critical system’s assets and data. The protection 
of critical assets and data is to be achieved through the, “implementation of state-of-the-art defense-in-
depth protective strategies” [RG 5.71 c (2)], whose aim “to ensure that the functions or tasks required to 
be performed by the critical assets … are maintained and carried out” [RG 5.71 c (4)] and “to prevent 
adverse effects from cyber-attacks” [RG5.71 c (3)]. The controls referred to in NIST 800.53 and the 

16 

 
recommendations relevant to those controls found in NIST 800.82, are defined in terms of three distinct 
classes: management, operational, and technical. 

The NRC has disclosed that there are many items to address in ensuring better cybersecurity measures are 
in place that are compliant with the NRC’s charter. Current efforts that it is investigating include:  

 

• 

Involvement with several industry specific and international standards groups for setting 
cybersecurity standards. They believe the best way to develop standards is to work with outside 
resources to maximize resources and progress. 

•  Commitment to shared learning regarding cybersecurity through engaging other Federal agencies. 
•  Use of ISO 26262 "Road vehicles -- Functional safety" and it’s reference standard, IEC 61508 

Functional Safety standard for automotive Electric/Electronic Systems are important source 
documents for NRC. 

•  Continual reassessment of NRC RG 5.71 Cybersecurity Guide as the cybersecurity landscape 

changes and to fully understand risks. 

•  Standardization and improvement of architectures for nuclear management devices and 

equipment to include elements such as Verification Tools and Diverse Redundancy “the power of 
5” in testing for design flaws. 
 

NIST 
NIST Special Publication 800 series of documents and the Federal Information Processing Standards 
Publication 199 Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems 
(FIPS 199) are the baseline cybersecurity standards used by the Federal Government.  

FIPS 199 is the mandatory standard to categorize all information and information systems collected or 
maintained by, or on behalf of, each Federal agency. FIPS 199 targets providing appropriate levels of 
information security according to impact of risks. This is the starting point for the use of the various NIST 
publications used to perform lifecycle security assessment, controls, and monitoring (as shown in Figure 
3 below).  

This process is again reminiscent of the lifecycle approach to Information Security discussed in Section 
3.1 above. The added feature here is the various NIST standards publications that provide the guidance 
for each element of the security lifecycle are highlighted.  

17 

 

 

Figure 3: Security Lifecycle and Corresponding NIST Publications 

 

 

NIST standards documents are valuable assets for the development of industry-specific cybersecurity 
guidance documents (e.g., NISTIR 7628 and others for Smart Grid).  

2.3.4 Financial Payments 
The financial payments industry has an interesting aspect that made it an appropriate industry to examine 
in this study─ that of distributed risk. The financial payments industry has a complex ecosystem that 
includes banks, card associations (Visa, MasterCard, etc.), merchants, acquirers (generally seen as the 
bank or entity that the merchant uses to process their payment card transactions), etc. Each of these 
entities plays a part in handling payment transactions and the sensitive cardholder data associated with 
them, leading to an interesting “supply chain” issue with respect to data security. Figure 4 was originally 
intended to show an example of the payment processing and fees for a debit or credit transaction, but has 
been re-purposed here to show the interplay of various players in the payments ecosystem. 

18 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: Financial Payment Ecosystemii 

This complex network of participants all of whom store or transmit cardholder sensitive information 
created a need to secure this distributed system. Many potential vulnerabilities surface that must be 
addressed and the financial payments industry, principally the card associations, or brands, led the 
development of payment card industry (PCI) standards for security of transaction and cardholder data. 
PCI standards mandate minimum-security requirements on all participating organizations in the 
distributed payment-processing ecosystem. 

These PCI standards ensure the end-to-end security of the payment process for the entire supply chain. 
These fit with the security of the communications between the card and reader that entails securing the 
magnetic card swipe or the contactless card tap through encryption, key management, etc. This-card to-
reader communications security was not germane to this research. 

 

Regulation 
Federal law is notably light on regulation of payment card data disclosure. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act takes some steps toward security regulation in the establishment of 
a Consumer Protections Bureau with the Federal Reserve, but other attempts to create specific regulations 
and fines to control data security have made it through committee, but not to the floor for a vote.  

These bills generally require that an entity handling or storing data above a certain volume be required to 
implement security protections, disclose breaches immediately, and provides a standard of fines. Thirty-
eight States have data breach disclosure laws, with varying degrees of civil and criminal penalties for 
noncompliance. Tort liability among banks and merchants has been the standard method of enforcement 
and recently, Federal courts have set strong precedent for data breach tort liability in class-action suits as 
well. The total cost to merchants can range from $90 to $305 per breached record.  

19 

 

 
To take control of the costs of breaches, credit card brands now have a standard schedule of fines with 
much lower or zero costs for merchants that have been participating in the PCI compliance programs and 
disclose breaches immediately. They also maintain zero-liability programs for cardholders and standard 
agreements among banks in the network to expedite fraud defense and keep matters out of the courts. 
Essentially, the payment brand networks have responded to the public demand and implemented security 
policies that mirror Federal regulatory objectives. It should be noted however, that cost figures to 
implement PCI standards are not trivial. IT research company Gartner, Inc., reported in 2008 that among 
the Level 1 retailers surveyed, an average of $2.7 million was spent to become PCI compliant, excluding 
the costs of PCI assessment. This figure represented a five-fold increase from 2006 costs.iii 

 

Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard 
The vast majority of attention in the card payment systems security is focused on securing traditional 
servers that store sensitive data. The basic approach mirrors the security practices throughout the IT 
industry, with feedback from fraud management practice. The Payment Card Industry Security Standards 
Council (PCI-SSC) codifies these practices, a body comprised of the major credit card networks (see 
www.pcisecuritystandards.org/). It should be emphasized that the financial payments industry took a 
top-down approach in mandating the PCI-DSS. The PCI-SSC consists only of credit card network 
operators -- no merchants, acquirers, etc.  

The standard mandates these practices and the enforcement model is distributed from the PCI-SSC to the 
individual network’s security programs, to the acquirers, to the merchants, which are the targets of most 
of the standard’s requirements. Although not directly involved with certification, the PCI-DSS provides 
certification requirements. These include yearly self-assessment for small merchants, and full audits by 
PCI-certified Qualified Security Assessors (QSAs) for large merchants, as well as quarterly network scans 
for all merchants. Payment applications have a similar program of standards and certification, the 
Payment Application Data Security Standard (PA-DSS). The actual standards are summarized in Table 3 
below. 

Table 3: PCI-DSS Objectives 

Control Objectives 

PCI DSS Requirements 

Build and Maintain a 
Secure Network 

Protect Cardholder 
Data 

Maintain a 
Vulnerability 
Management 
Program 

1. Install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder 
data 
2. Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and 
other security parameters 
3. Protect stored cardholder data 
4. Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public 
networks 
5. Use and regularly update anti-virus software on all systems 
commonly affected by malware 

6. Develop and maintain secure systems and applications 

20 

 

 

Implement Strong 
Access Control 
Measures 

Regularly Monitor 
and Test Networks 

Maintain an 
Information Security 
Policy 
 

7. Restrict access to cardholder data by business need-to-know 
8. Assign a unique ID to each person with computer access 
9. Restrict physical access to cardholder data 
10. Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder 
data 
11. Regularly test security systems and processes 

12. Maintain a policy that addresses information security 

These 12 basic principles of IT security are again reminiscent of the stages covered by the Information 
Security Lifecycle approach. They provide a best-practices defense and audit trail against known and 
unskilled attacks, which comprise the vast majority of the threats and have not changed significantly in 
recent years.  

For the PCI-DSS certified systems that have experienced data loss, the majority were found to be 
improper certified, and the forensic evidence suggests that proper application of the PCI-DSS would have 
prevented the breach. Even with full adherence to the standard, however, there is still significant potential 
threat from specifically targeted zero-day and insider attacks because payment processing inherently 
requires the use and transmission of sensitive information throughout the processing chain of several 
parties.  

 

Scanning and Assessment 
PCI-DSS requires merchants to regularly scan their network environment and perform assessment to 
ensure compliance. Acquirers must collect this information from each merchant and report it to the 
security compliance program of the card networks, with differing requirements based on the merchant’s 
annual transaction level. These transaction levels are not delineated by PCI, but are relatively standard 
among payment brands. Quarterly automated network scans with software from the PCI’s list of approved 
scanning vendors. Annual in-depth assessments are also required, in the form of a self-assessment 
questionnaire (SAQ) or an on-site assessment by a PCI-SSC certified qualified security assessor, either 
internal or external. 

 

Certification 
For small merchants, depending on the payment brand requirements, the PCI-SSC provides a standard 
SAQ for PCI DSS compliance. Larger merchants and processors, however, are required by the payment 
brands to undergo regular scanning and assessment by council-certified vendors. The PCI-SSC maintains 
the programs for certification of approved scanning vendors, qualified security assessors for merchants, 
internal security assessors for issuers and acquirers, and payment application qualified security assessors 
for third-party processing applications.  

21 

 

 
The certification processes includes admission to the program, mandatory training, certification testing, 
ongoing compliance testing, and periodic recertification. To gain admission, a business must demonstrate 
legitimacy, independence, and insurance coverage, as well as to sign agreements and pay fees to the PCI-
SSC. The business also must show that each of its assessors has at least one year of full-time experience 
in three specified security domains, a bachelor’s degree, and a specified security industry certification. 
Additionally, the business must show that it has the facilities, equipment, capabilities, and procedures in 
place to handle the assessment work. 

Training for assessor staff consists of an online course and test, followed by two-day live course. The 
PCI-SSC then oversees mock assessments, which may be ordered at their discretion, and recertifies staff. 
Yearly recertification requires compliance with the original requirements as well as continuing education 
credits assigned by the council. The PCI-SSC maintains lists of approved vendors and applications. 

2.3.5 Medical Devices 
The Food and Drug Administration emphasizes that cybersecurity for medical devices and their 
associated communication networks is a shared responsibility between medical device manufacturers and 
medical device user facilities. The proper maintenance of cybersecurity for medical devices and hospital 
networks is vitally important to public health because it ensures the integrity of the computer networks 
that support medical devices. Perhaps more importantly, those medical devices that monitor critical life 
functions and/or administer medicine have an elevated risk factor in terms of cyber-attack implications.  

A rapidly growing cybersecurity problem can have devastating results to healthcare patients, and 
healthcare operations of all sizes. This escalating concern comes on the eve of rapid transition from 
conventional radiology-related capture methods to the growing digital picture archiving and 
communications systems (PACS).  

Entire departments are being converted to digital imaging and reporting. Archived images are being 
scanned and stored on computer drives. In addition, diagnosis is being conducted from these same 
computer systems. It is entirely possible that a virus or worm can makes its way into such systems that 
can result in the destruction and hence the loss, or mishandled dispersion, of critical information. 

 

Regulations in Place 
FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) is responsible for regulating firms that 
manufacture, repackage, and/or import medical devices sold in the United States. In addition, CDRH 
regulates radiation-emitting electronic products (medical and non-medical) such as lasers, x-ray systems, 
ultrasound equipment, microwave ovens, and color televisions. 

Medical devices are classified into Class 1, 2, and 3 with regulatory control increasing from Class 1 to 
Class 3. The device classification regulation defines the regulatory requirements for a general device type. 
Most Class 1 devices are exempt from Premarket Notification 510(k); most Class 2 devices require 
Premarket Notification 510(k); and most Class 3 devices require premarket approval. 

22 

 
Medical devices distributed in the United States are subject to General Controls─ pre-marketing and post 
marketing regulatory controls. The basic regulatory requirements that manufacturers of medical devices 
distributed in the United States must comply with are: 

 

•  Establishment Registration - 21 CFR Part 807; 
•  Medical Device Listing - 21CFR Part 807; 
•  Premarket Notification 510(k) - 21 CFR Part 807 Subpart E; 
•  Premarket Approval (PMA) - 21 CFR Part 814; 
• 
•  Quality System Regulation (QS)/Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) - 21 CFR Part 820; 
•  Labeling - 21 CFR Part 801; and 
•  Medical Device Reporting - 21 CFR Part 803. 

Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) - 21CFR Part 812; 

 

Industry Issues 
FDA is aware of misinterpretation of the regulations for the cybersecurity of medical devices that are 
connected to computer networks. Hospitals and device manufacturers do not agree on interpretation of 
roles and responsibilities in FDA regulations with respect to cybersecurity. To manage this process the 
FDA has issued a document on cybersecurity that strives to answer specific questions on the issue.  

FDA’s interpretation of the regulations can be found in the 2005 Guidance for Industry - Cybersecurity 
for Networked Medical Devices Containing Off-the-Shelf (OTS) Software (January 14, 2005) and its 
accompanying information for healthcare organizations. FDA emphasizes the following: 

•  Medical device manufacturers and user facilities should work together to ensure that 

cybersecurity threats are addressed in a timely manner; 

•  The agency typically does not need to review or approve medical device software changes made 

for cybersecurity reasons; 

•  All software changes that address cybersecurity threats should be validated before installation to 

ensure they do not affect the safety and effectiveness of the medical devices; 

•  One of the more important questions is one of responsibility. The FDA makes it clear in 21 CFR 
820.100 that the manufacturer is responsible stating that threats should be addressed directly to 
the manufacturer (The FDA also states in 21 CFR 820.30(i) that manufacturers need to validate 
any patches implemented (to ensure the device’s safety and efficacy. However, device 
manufacturers have major concerns regarding validation of implementation of changes or patches 
to their software. Therefore, manufacturers typically do not take proactive action, or simply delay 
until delivery of software patches is necessary. Hospitals and care providers point out that the 
consequences of this inactivity can be devastating to the industry. 

Enforcement Efforts 
Most enforcement efforts are conducted with inspections and punitive damages for violations that hurt the 
medical device manufacture’s profits and market position. When the FDA enforces its regulatory 
authority, it uses the following methods:  

23 

 

 

1.  Application Integrity Policy - Regarding the integrity of data and information in applications 

submitted for FDA review and approval 

2.  Bioresearch Monitoring Program (BIMO) - On-site inspections and data audits designed to 

monitor all aspects of the conduct and reporting of FDA regulated research. The BIMO program 
was established to ensure the quality and integrity of data submitted to the agency in support of 
new product approvals, as well as, to provide for protection of the rights and welfare of the 
thousands of human subjects involved in FDA regulated research 

3.  Disqualified/Restricted/Assurance List for Clinical Investigators- Restricted from receiving 

investigational drugs, biologics, or devices if FDA determines that the investigator has repeatedly 
or deliberately failed to comply with regulatory requirements for studies or has submitted false 
information to the study's sponsor 

4.  Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures, 21 CFR Part 11- Background information and 
updates on the rule that allows the use of electronic records and electronic signatures for any 
record that is required to be kept and maintained by other FDA regulations 

5.  FDA Debarment List - Firms or individuals convicted of a felony under Federal law for conduct 

(by a firm) relating to the development or approval, including the process for development or 
approval, of any abbreviated drug application; or (an individual convicted) for conduct relating to 
development or approval of any drug product, or otherwise relating to any drug product under the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 

6.  FDA Notice of Initiation of Disqualification Proceedings and Opportunity to Explain 

(NIDPOE) Letters - A NIDPOE letter informs the recipient clinical investigator that FDA is 
initiating an administrative proceeding to determine whether the clinical investigator should be 
disqualified from receiving investigational products pursuant to the Food and Drug 
Administration's regulations. Generally, FDA issues a NIDPOE letter when it believes it has 
evidence that the clinical investigator repeatedly or deliberately violated FDA's regulations 
governing the proper conduct of clinical studies involving investigational products or submitted 
false information to the sponsor 

7.  Public Health Service (PHS) Administrative Actions Listings- Lists certain individuals who 

have had administrative actions imposed against them. The PHS Office of Research Integrity 
(ORI) maintains the list 

8.  Reading Room (Electronic Freedom of Information Act) – FDA’s Office of Regulatory 

Affairs (ORA) documents frequently requested by the public through the Freedom of Information 
Act 
 

New and Ongoing Challenges  
Some of the challenges and issues FDA is focused on include the following. 

Risk Assessment 

•  FDA has limited resources and is seeking good guidance in obtaining better cybersecurity 

controls for medical devices;) risk assessment is a huge challenge, and an evolving problem.  

•  Advances of ISO Standard 14971 (which is focused on RA) is a good engagement point to 

improve the FDA’s risk mitigation position. 

24 

 

 

International Manufacturing 

•  There is an increasing set of problems due to medical devices and other FDA regulated items 

in general being manufactured overseas and importing sub-par devices.  

•  Punitive damages are harder to enforce and control in this international environment, and 

tighter controls are needed. 

•  FDA is currently performing more inspections to these international manufacturing sites to 

curtail and slow down mismanaged operations that try to circumvent FDA regulatory 
compliance via international law. 

Engineering & Architectural Controls 

•  A new guidance document is needed to standardize and improve architectures for medical 

devices. 

•  FDA is working with NRC gain insight on how best to address component vendors.  

2.3.6 Automotive 
While not explicitly a subject for this study, the automotive industry began to come into focus in the latter 
stages of the research process. A next step was an examination of how best practices from other industries 
could affect the need for cybersecurity in the automotive industry. Some key activities helped this shift 
into examining the needs of the automotive industry, which are described below.  

European Activities 
Several European programs have produced helpful information on this subject. First, the E-Safety Vehicle 
Intrusion Protected Applications (EVITA) program is a 3-year, $6 million project that completed in 
December 2011; a prototype demonstration occurred at the November ESCAR conference.  

Second is the ESCAR conference now in its ninth year. The proceedings of each annual conference are 
published and available free of charge on the ESCAR conference Web site at 
www.escar.info/index.php?id=12.   

Third, the Infineon SME interview yielded discussion of the development of new CAN bus alternatives 
that are based on time-triggered protocol. Examples include the FlexRay approach being fielded in high-
end German models. FlexRay was developed by the FlexRay consortium, whose membership included 
multiple automotive OEMs, suppliers, and microcontroller technology vendors such as Motorola, Philips, 
and ST Micro. 

The SAE Security Committee actively discusses leading edge approaches to automotive security. This 
discussion has included the European research efforts. 

 

 

 

25 

 

 
SAE Security Committee 

NHTSA is a non-voting liaison member participating in the SAE Security Committee (Web site at 
www.sae.org/servlets/works/committeeHome.do?comtID=TEVEES18). Members of the 
committee tend to be functional safety engineers and system/hardware/software developers. 
The cybersecurity skillset does not often reside in operational competency areas - even if the labor 
resources are technical in nature. The cybersecurity skillset historically is deemed a function of IT 
personnel ─ the CIO, chief security officer (CSO), and subordinates. The designers and operators of 
operational systems should acquire these skillsets. We observed this in all industries studied. 
The SAE Security Committee’s mission is to develop and maintain recommended practices and 
information reports in the area of vehicle electrical systems’ security. The committee’s scope is on-
board vehicle electrical systems that affect vehicle control or otherwise act contrary to the 
occupants’ interests if the systems are manipulated by an attacker.  

The goals of the committee are:  

•  To identify and recommend strategies and techniques related to preventing and detecting 

adversarial breaches, and 

•  Mitigating undesirable effects if a breach is achieved. 

The SAE Security Committee submitted a response to the Request for Information (RFI). Their response 
is discussed in the RFI section below. The group seems to be involved in general cybersecurity best 
practices information gathering having investigated both the EVITA program and the NIST cybersecurity 
standards documents. They are focused on not only building their cybersecurity body of knowledge, but 
also finding a baseline document to use to develop automotive industry-specific cybersecurity guidelines. 

EVITA 
The objective of EVITA is to design, verify, and prototype a modular, cost-efficient security solution for 
automotive on-board networks. This will protect sensitive data within such networks against compromise 
and, in doing so, enable secure communication among cars and between cars and infrastructure. 

Some high-level background on EVITA: 

•  Consortium of European private sector, OEM (BMW), and suppliers as well as academia 
•  Effort funded by the European Commission and consumed 3 years and $6 million (50% matched 

by consortium members). 

•  The EVITA Security Risk Management approach drew upon cybersecurity risk management best 

practices in cybersecurity (NIST standards) and functional safety (ISO 26262). 

•  The EVITA Security Risk Management approach is a candidate for use as a baseline for a tailored 

Risk Management Guideline for the SAE Security Committee. 

It is to be determined if the technical Hardware Security Module (HSM) specification is an appropriate 
source for a baseline technical security specification in the United States. However, as noted above, 
EVITA’s proposed Security Risk Management approach may be beneficial as baseline guidance for the 
U.S. automotive industry. Using these security guidelines as a baseline in the U.S. automotive industry 

26 

 
will leverage the EVITA work that modified cybersecurity and functional safety best practices to 
delineate automotive industry-specific guidelines.  

 

 

2.4 Request for Information 
The RFI for Cybersecurity and Safety of Motor Vehicles Equipped with Electronic Control Systems was 
released on August 2, 2011. Of the 13 responses that were received, three in particular are noteworthy.  

SAE Security Committee 
First, the SAE Security Committee submitted a response. The highlights of this response included the 
identification of the EVITA project as having done ”significant work in the area of automotive security 
risk assessment” and added “the committee feels that this [EVITA] is a subject that will need additional 
investigation as the industry continues to work in the area cybersecurity.” 

Another noteworthy issue in the response is that “currently the CAN protocol has no explicit support for 
security mechanisms,” and “…it is challenging to add effective security layered on top of the protocol”, 
finally, adding that “the committee will likely also investigate techniques to secure other in-vehicle 
networking technologies.” 

The last significant suggestion of the SAE Security Committee is that an Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center (ISAC) would be beneficial. However, the committee noted that, due to the participation 
of competitive private sector suppliers and OEMs within SAE, and owing to the need to openly share 
sensitive information about risks and vulnerabilities, SAE would not be the appropriate forum for an 
ISAC. 

EVITA 
EVITA focused much of its response on the technology solution the EVITA project developed - the 
Hardware Security Module (HSM). 

By virtue of both their RFI response and ongoing conversations, it is believed that the automotive 
industry-specific cybersecurity guidelines developed by EVITA could be a basis for the US industry. 
Beyond the discussion of the HSM approach, the EVITA submission yielded two intriguing points: 

1.  Delineating potential attacks and related security requirements served as the starting point for 

developing a technical solution 

2.  V2X security efforts are focused on the V2X communication and vehicles and infrastructure in 

the connected vehicle ecosystem must be secure.  

This second point is especially important. The EVITA consortium is stating that in a V2X world, security 
should be examined holistically from end-to-end. The vehicle itself─ the in-vehicle network and its 
security from “the outside world,” as well as the security of any roadside infrastructure, should be 
addressed in addition to the security of the communications and V2X transactions. This is a key 
observation for the U.S. marketplace with respect to connected vehicle development.  

 

27 

 

 
Toyota 
The Toyota response yielded two issues worth noting: 

1.  It highlighted the importance of determining accountability for security countermeasures’ 
2.  It highlighted the necessity for developing cybersecurity countermeasures within the on-board 

diagnostics (OBD) protocol. 
 

2.5 Challenges and Issues 
This section brings together the various challenges and issues seen throughout the industries studied. 
When formulating a strategy regarding cybersecurity in the automotive industry the following challenges 
and issues are important: 

•  The transportation mission is currently safety focused not security focused. 

–  Transportation modes are now correlating security and safety; one can’t have a safe 

system without it being a secure system 
 

•  There is a perception that there is “no Return on Investment for security.” 

–  But what is the “cost” of a security breach (monetary, liability, loss of good name, etc.)? 

It depends on the severity of the outcome. 

•  Operations systems now use Information Technology and wireless communications extensively. 

–  Systems are no longer closed; they are connected through IT and Communications and 

are inherently more vulnerable and hackers now know about them. 

– 

IT security best practices are being applied to operational systems. 

•  The normal approach to cybersecurity of operational systems, hardware, and software is to add 

security measures after they are developed and fielded.  
 

•  Skillsets for cybersecurity tend to lie in the IT core competency and are not resident in the 

developers of operations systems, hardware, and software. 

2.6 Observations 
The research of the various industries studied has yielded some best practices for consideration. These 
best practices may become elements of a strategic cybersecurity roadmap. Attributions to industries where 
the finding was derived are in parentheses. 

 

Cybersecurity is a lifecycle process that includes elements of assessment, design, implementation, and 
operations as well as an effective testing and certification program. (All Industries) 

28 

 
Multiple industries studied all point to the need to be continually vigilant in securing systems, networks, 
hardware, and software.  

 

 

The aviation industry has some similarities to the automotive industry (FAA) 

The aviation industry and automotive industry share some similarities. Vehicles and aircraft are both 
becoming extensively eEnabled and connected. Additionally, the migration to the NEXTGEN air traffic 
control environment mirrors the development of the Cooperative Vehicle environment, both yielding 
exponentially more issues with respect to cybersecurity vulnerabilities. NHTSA and FAA have very 
different statutory authorities. 

 

Leadership from the Federal government can help the development of industry-specific cybersecurity 
standards, guidelines, and best practices (FAA) 

It was observed that leadership from the Federal government can help the development of industry-
specific cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and best practices. Some industries support the idea of 
Federal minimum-security requirements. 

 

Ongoing shared learning with other Federal Government agencies is beneficial (FAA, NRC, FDA, NIST) 

This research was a first step in the process of elevating NHTSA’s baseline knowledge of cybersecurity. 
The learning process should continue through ongoing cooperation with key government agencies such as 
FAA, NRC, FDA, and NIST. In particular, FAA is moving toward rulemaking. FAA has done much 
learning in concert with the NRC as an example and FAA subject matter experts referenced NRC 
activities on several occasions. 

 

Use of NIST Cybersecurity Standards is a way to accelerate development of an industry-specific 
cybersecurity guideline (All Industries) 

The NIST cybersecurity suite of standards documents is often used as a baseline to industry-specific 
security guidelines. 

 

International cybersecurity efforts are an important source of information (FAA, automotive) 

The research has revealed several efforts in Europe that have been ongoing and show some success 
addressing cybersecurity issues. Examples are: 

•  The annual ESCAR Conference, which highlights security developments, is in its 9th year. 

29 

 

 

•  The FlexRay Consortium developed an alternative approach to the CAN communications bus 

based on Time-Triggered Protocol that addresses a baseline security issue in the CAN approach. 

•  The EVITA security guidelines documents. 

 

Consider developing a cybersecurity simulator that can facilitate identification of vulnerabilities and 
risk mitigation strategies (FAA) 

FAA engaged the Volpe Center to work with academia to develop the ANSS and initially do “white hat” 
hacking exercises to highlight vulnerabilities in the Gatelink, a vital device that communications flight 
data with aircraft at the gate.  

While this laboratory environment has been valuable for collaborative learning between government, 
academia, private sector, and internationally, FAA is now beginning rulemaking (discussed above) and 
will use the ANSS to examine each of their identified eEnabled “points of pain” as a starting point to the 
rulemaking process.  

 

There should be cybersecurity standards for the entire supply chain (financial payments, automotive) 

This was a key observation from the financial payments industry, which has a unique distributed risk 
model since the financial payments network is a complicated ecosystem where many organizations handle 
sensitive transaction and cardholder data. The card associations (Visa, MasterCard, etc.) formed the 
Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI-SSC) and developed the Payment Card Industry 
Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS). All those in the payment-processing ecosystem mandate PCI-DSS for 
use. This requirement can be a model for the need to ensure security throughout the supply chain (both 
pre-production and post-sale) in the automotive industry. 

 

Foster industry cybersecurity groups  

Establishing an Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) and an automotive industry 
Cybersecurity Emergency Response Team (CERT) should be investigated. CERTs act as a resource for 
cybersecurity professionals to highlight cybersecurity incidents and provide support for incident response 
and forensic analysis as well as act as a conduit for topical cybersecurity information. For example, 
Federal agencies are required identify IT breaches to US-CERT. US-CERT then follows their procedures 
for examination and mitigation of the breach.  

ISACs are extremely valuable, cross-industry organizations that act as clearinghouses for information on 
cyber and physical threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions. They help members better understand their 
threats and vulnerabilities and are forums for anonymous submission regarding specific vulnerabilities 
and security breaches. The SAE Security Committee highlighted the need for an automotive industry 
ISAC in their RFI response. 

 

30 

 
Use Professional Capacity Building to develop cybersecurity skillsets in system designers and engineers 
(All) 

Many industries see a disconnect between the security skillsets of the technical resources developing 
operation systems and those needed. Traditionally cybersecurity has been seen as the domain of the IT 
department, but this is clearly no longer the case. Momentum is gaining in the US automotive industry 
due to the Toyota Camry sudden acceleration incident in 2010 and the various academic research projects 
demonstrating the vulnerabilities of modern vehicles.  

 

 

Connected Vehicle security should be end-to-end; vehicles, infrastructure, and V2X communication 
should all be secure (aviation, automotive [specifically EVITA]) 

This was an issue highlighted by EVITA in their RFI submission. They stated that in their research of 
various European V2X security efforts, none were examining security beyond the communications itself. 
Rather, these security efforts simply noted that vehicles and infrastructure must be secure. Therefore, 
there is a strong need for NHTSA and the Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office to 
work together to ensure end-to-end security in a Connected Vehicle world. 

Mapping Best Practices to the Information Security Lifecycle  
Mapping these key observations to the process of a lifecycle information security program is a good 
exercise to show a process that may provide input to NHTSA’s development of a strategic roadmap. First, 
Figure 5 provides a reminder of what the Information Security Lifecycle Process entails. 

31 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Information Security Lifecycle Process 

 

The key observations are mapped to this lifecycle process in Figure 6.  

32 

 

 

 

Figure 6: Key Observations Mapped to the Lifecycle Process 

33 

 

 

2.7 References	
                                                            
i U.S. Department of Transportation. (2011, August). Cyber security and safety of motor vehicles 

equipped with electronic control systems (RFI Solicitation Number: DTRT57‐11‐SS‐
00007). Retrieved from www.fbo.gov/spg/DOT/RITA/VNTSC/DTRT57‐11‐SS‐
00007/listing.html 

ii Government Accountability Office. (2009, November 19). Credit cards rising interchange fees 

have increased costs for merchants, but options for reducing fees pose challenges. 
(Report No. GAO‐10‐4). Washington, DC: Author. 

iii Cost of PCI Compliance. (2009, September 17). (Web oage). PCI DSS Compliance Blog. 

Retrieved from http://blog.elementps.com/element_payment_solutions/2009/02/pci‐
compliance‐costs.html  

34 

DOT HS 812 075   
October 2014

10929-100814-v3

