IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

853

Cybersecurity for Critical Infrastructures:

Attack and Defense Modeling

Chee-Wooi Ten, Student Member, IEEE, Govindarasu Manimaran, Senior Member, IEEE, and

Chen-Ching Liu, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Disruption of electric power operations can be
catastrophic on national security and the economy. Due to the
complexity of widely dispersed assets and the interdependences
among computer, communication, and power infrastructures, the
requirement to meet security and quality compliance on opera-
tions is a challenging issue. In recent years, the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) established a cybersecu-
rity standard that requires utilities’ compliance on cybersecurity
of control systems. This standard identiﬁes several cyber-related
vulnerabilities that exist in control systems and recommends
several remedial actions (e.g., best practices). In this paper, a
comprehensive survey on cybersecurity of critical infrastructures
is reported. A supervisory control and data acquisition security
framework with the following four major components is proposed:
1) real-time monitoring; 2) anomaly detection; 3) impact analy-
sis; and 4) mitigation strategies. In addition, an attack-tree-based
methodology for impact analysis is developed. The attack-tree
formulation based on power system control networks is used to
evaluate system-, scenario-, and leaf-level vulnerabilities by iden-
tifying the system’s adversary objectives. The leaf vulnerability
is fundamental to the methodology that involves port auditing or
password strength evaluation. The measure of vulnerabilities in
the power system control framework is determined based on ex-
isting cybersecurity conditions, and then, the vulnerability indices
are evaluated.

Index Terms—Attack tree, cybersecurity, defense systems,

power system control, security vulnerability.

I. INTRODUCTION

C RITICAL infrastructures are complex physical and cyber-

based systems that form the lifeline of a modern soci-
ety, and their reliable and secure operation is of paramount
importance to national security and economic vitality. In most
sense, the cyber system forms the backbone of a nation’s critical
infrastructures, which means that a major security incident on
cyber systems could have signiﬁcant impacts on the reliable
and safe operations of the physical systems that rely on it.
The recent ﬁndings, as documented in government reports [1]–
[7], indicate the growing threat of physical and cyber-based

Manuscript received July 2, 2008. Date of publication June 3, 2010; date
of current version June 16, 2010. This work was supported by the Elec-
tric Power Research Center, Iowa State University. The authors would also
like to acknowledge partial support by the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI)
and U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF). This paper was recommended
by M. Ulieru.

C.-W. Ten and C.-C. Liu are with the School of Electrical, Electronic and
Mechanical Engineering, University College Dublin, National University of
Ireland, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland (e-mail: cheewooi.ten@ucd.ie; liu@ucd.ie).
G. Manimaran is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50010 USA (e-mail: gmani@iastate.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online

at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSMCA.2010.2048028

attacks in numbers and sophistication on electric grids and
other critical infrastructure systems. The focus of this paper
is the cybersecurity of an electric power infrastructure. The
three modes of malicious attacks on power infrastructure are
as follows: 1) attack upon the system; 2) attack by the system;
and 3) attack through the system [8].

Physical security of the power infrastructure has been recog-
nized by the power community as an important issue. One
example precaution was to prevent vandalism on unmanned
substations [9]. Due to the growing concern over the potential
sabotage, the focus of physical security has been broadened
to incorporate critical substations that may result in cascading
effects, leading to a wide-area blackout [10]. The application of
sensors to monitor the structural health of transmission lines is
also an important way to reduce the power system vulnerability
[11]. Electronic security is as important as physical security due
to the potential impact that can be made through operations
of critical cyberassets. Electronic security here refers to the
security of critical cyberassets of the power infrastructure. It
includes the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems that are widely used in the industry for monitoring
and control of the power grid. These systems include computer
and communication devices installed in power plants, substa-
tions, energy control centers, company headquarters, regional
operating ofﬁces, and large load sites. Cybersecurity of crit-
ical infrastructures systems encompasses three major control
systems. SCADA systems are the central nerve system of a
wide-area control network that constantly gathers the latest
status from remote units [1]. A process control system (PCS) is
implemented with a closed-loop control for an ongoing task. A
distributed control system (DCS) is the complex combinations
of SCADA and PCS. Fundamental materials about SCADA are
further detailed in [3], [12], and [13]. A variety of communica-
tion systems are deployed on the power grid for the purpose of
monitoring and control. The analog and status data acquired by
SCADA are utilized by an energy management system (EMS)
in the control center to perform a wide range of system func-
tions, including real-time control. The communication system
for wide-area protection and control of a power system can
be weakened due to component failures or communication
delays [14]. Failure of an important communication channel
in the operational environment could result in an inability to
control or operate important facilities, leading to possible power
outages. Other than the communication between the control
center and substations that has long been established, the inter-
control center communication through the Internet serves as the
data exchange mechanism between interconnected networks
[15]. Analyzing the events at the interfaces between power and

1083-4427/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

telecommunication systems is an important way to understand
their dependences [16]. The use of standard protocols on critical
systems leads to a source of vulnerability [17].

Due to technological changes over the last decade, protocols
have been reﬁned to become more ﬂexible in their interoper-
ability and maintainability, speciﬁcally in an open architecture
with high-speed communications [12], [18]. The evolution of
SCADA systems has also raised concerns about cyber-related
vulnerabilities [2], [13]. In addition, interdependences among
computers, communication, and power infrastructures have in-
creased the risks due to complexity of the integrated infrastruc-
tures [19]. Although the complex infrastructure provides great
capabilities for operation, control, business, and analysis, it
also increases security risks due to cyber-related vulnerabilities.
Technological advances can help to reduce the deﬁciencies of
current power and communication systems [20]. However, tech-
nological complexity can also lead to security breaches that are
prone to electronic intrusions. A successful intrusion into the
control networks can lead to undesirable switching operations
executed by attackers, resulting in widespread power outages.
Another potential scenarios are intrusion into one or more
substations and alteration of the protective relay settings, which
could result in undesirable tripping of circuit breakers. The
vulnerabilities of a power system include three main compo-
nents, i.e., computer, communication, and power system [21]–
[24]. Attacks can be targeted at speciﬁc systems, subsystems,
and multiple locations simultaneously from a remote location.
Entities in the control center, substation automation system
(SAS) [25], [26], distribution management system, Independent
System Operator (ISO), and power plant process control system
[27]–[31] are interlinked. Interdependence plays an essential
role in vulnerability assessment. An enhanced authentication
process on the critical cyberassets, such as access to certain
control functions, should be validated through the biometric
features of an individual [32].

Security awareness for emerging technologies is critical to
prevent cyberattacks. Information security in an open system
architecture, with respect to potential threats and goals (in terms
of conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability), is
a challenging task [33]. ISO/IEC 17779 recommends a list of
important controls on the information security management
system [34]. A virtual enterprise is one way to promote a
collaborative group of managing existing network enterprises
by coordinating, controlling, and communicating remotely to
the networks with different roles and user types [35]. Govern-
ments have responded by increasing national readiness as the
connectivity of control networks increases [4]. Vulnerability
assessment for process control systems has been recognized
as an important task that has an impact on power system
operation [36], [37]. The International Electrotechnical Com-
mission Technical Council (IEC TC 57), i.e., power system
management and associated information exchange, has ad-
vanced the standard communication protocol security in
IEC62351 with stronger encryption and authentication mecha-
nisms [38]. Such mechanisms allow veriﬁcation and evaluation
of potential threats. Aside from the deﬁciencies of the commu-
nication architecture on availability, scalability, and quality of
service in real time, a new approach has been envisioned for
strengthening power grid in terms of security, efﬁciency, and
reliability [39], [40].

The observation of computer intruder activities by the U.S.
Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) has been
undertaken since the late 1980s. The sophistication of attack
trends has advanced from automated to highly ﬁrewall-
permeable and distributed fashions [41]. Increasingly sophis-
ticated tools help to penetrate existing network connections
[42]. Reference [7] identiﬁes the latest cybersecurity technolo-
gies for protection. The ﬁndings in a 2004 report from the
Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO) [3] highlight the
extensive plans of sabotage to disrupt the U.S. power grid.
A survey conducted by electric utilities indicates the growing
concern over the attacks on power grid through communi-
cation security breaches. Intrusion into the control networks
remains the highest concern based on the survey [43]. Recent
computer crime and security surveys from the Computer Se-
curity Institute (CSI) indicate that the system penetration by
outsiders may cause high ﬁnancial losses [44]. Speciﬁcally,
it is the third highest ﬁnancial loss among other attack types
based on the 2007 survey. Due to the fast-growing intrusion
attempts through cyberspace, the analysis of direct and indirect
cybervulnerabilities and cyberthreats is important. The analysis
identiﬁes the possible consequences and measures to prevent
them from attacks [45]. Awareness programs about exploited
vulnerabilities are set up to improve the control system security
[46]. Initiatives addressing the critical infrastructures have been
established by US-CERT, i.e., national SCADA test beds [47],
[48]. Traditional IT solutions may not be well positioned to
control systems in which CERT and national test beds are set up
for strengthening the defense for the domain-speciﬁc purpose
[49]. The initial intention of the American Gas Association
12 Task Group is to establish the protection guidelines for
gas SCADA systems [50]. The guidelines have been applied
to water and electricity SCADA systems due to technical and
operational similarities. The compliance set by North American
Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) Critical Infrastructure
Protection has established permanent policies for utilities in
the U.S. that are helpful for the reduction of risks from a
compromise of critical cyberassets [51], [52]. A comparison
between compliance standards of power entity and other similar
SCADA systems has been reported in [6] and [53]. Research
on information security has stressed on modeling dependability
[54] and risk assessment framework [55], [56]. A new paradigm
for classiﬁcation of the security level using declustering in
database is introduced [57]. Correlation is also a technique to
identify intrusion into a network [58]. A game approach to
modeling of response strategies for attackers and administrators
is used as a technique to enhance network security [59].

II. SCADA SECURITY FRAMEWORK

A strategic roadmap framework has been developed to ad-
dress the security issue in a proactive manner [1], [60], [61].
To assess the information security of control systems, it is
useful to quantify the resiliency of a power grid in terms of
threats and the impact that they can make. Interdependence
modeling with computer and communication infrastructures is
useful for determination of the system bottleneck [62], [63].
Security system engineering deals with adversary models that
describe attack objectives and relevant impact/mission based on
hypotheses [64]. The key is to identify the system properties.

TEN et al.: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

855

Fig. 1. Proposed SCADA Security Framework: RAIM Framework.

Understanding of the mission impact facilitates analytical eval-
uation of the interdependences among infrastructures that can
hinder the effectiveness of attack modeling [65]. Analysis of
the economic impact helps to identify the appropriate measures
that mitigate risks at pivotal network nodes [66], [67].

Fig. 1 shows the proposed security SCADA framework,
which encompasses four key components: 1) real-time moni-
toring; 2) anomaly detection; 3) impact analysis; and 4) miti-
gation strategies (RAIM). Each of the key components will be
elaborated next.

A. Real-Time Monitoring

A variety of information networks are interconnected to the
electric power grid for the purposes of sensing, monitoring, and
control [68], [69]. These information networks are closely asso-
ciated with the SCADA system. The environment of a SCADA
system involves a control center, intelligent electronic devices
(IEDs) at substations, distributed sensors that measure electrical
and other quantities on the network, and a variety of communi-
cation links between the control center and substations. These
communication links are wireline circuits, microwave channels,
or power-line carrier channels. As mentioned, the data acquired
through the SCADA system are utilized in the EMS for a wide
range of system operation and real-time control functions.

Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks are among the most detri-
mental, which affect computer and communication perfor-
mance through resource exhaustion in terms of compute
cycles, buffers, and communication bandwidth [69]. A typical

resource exhaustion attack, such as a packet ﬂooding attack,
involves compromised machines sending a large number of
spurious packets to a target server(s) and/or network, which is
the potential victim. In addition, there have been large-scale
worm propagation activities in recent years that consume a
signiﬁcant amount of compute and network resources, causing
disruptions to information infrastructure systems. DoS attacks
have evolved to distributed forms [70]. Building a norm proﬁle
is essential to detect various ﬂooding attacks by identifying
the changes from normal activities. Information and commu-
nication infrastructures that are integral parts of the electric
power system are not exempt from this potential trend and
the consequences. In fact, these issues are more pronounced
in critical infrastructure systems due to the legacy nature of
the information/communication technologies used therein and
the catastrophic nature of the consequences. For example,
a DoS attack on power infrastructure elements such as the
substation, control center, or the communication network can
have a serious effect on the SCADA system and the associ-
ated critical functions. These functions include state estima-
tion, alarm processing, and preventive or emergency controls.
Resource-exhaustion-based DoS attacks could come in the
following forms in an electric power grid environment.

1) They slow down or bring down the control center
network, causing degradation in its real-time control
performance.

2) They slow down or bring down SASs, causing degrada-

tion in real-time sensing and actuation performance.

856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

3) Congest the forward and/or backward communication
paths, causing the communication latencies to exceed
the limit that can be tolerated for real-time SCADA
operation.

Resource-exhaustion-based DoS attacks can be launched
even if control centers and substations are fully secured by
the latest security technologies and secure versions of SCADA
protocols. Examples of secure versions are Modbus and Inter-
Control Center Communication Protocols (ICCP) [15].

B. Anomaly Detection

Anomaly detection is based on event correlation techniques
to systematically establish the relationship between statistical
data sets from various sources. This is an approach to ex-
tract and analyze the audit data from power instruments and
cyber-related logs to distinguish if a threat is credible [41].
Event correlations can be categorized as follows: 1) temporal;
2) spatial; or 3) hybrid. These combinations introduce a dif-
ferent perspective of threats that may capture local or global
abnormality [71], [72].

Sources in SASs that can be correlated in the substation-level
(local) and control center (global) networks include the follow-
ing : 1) relay setting of IEDs [73], [74]; 2) user credentials and
application logs; 3) trafﬁc logs, such as volume within local
and global networks; and 4) status of running applications. An
adaptive anomaly detection strategy to deal with the incomplete
data is essential, particularly to identify intentional deception
or data errors [75]. Threats such as actual intrusions, intrusion
attempts, or DoS shall be inferred through correlation analysis.
The correlations that may be applied to the power infrastructure
are as follows.

1) Temporal correlation: This is a data extraction from a
local environment that can be learning- or rule-based by
training the instrumental devices to detect the malicious
modiﬁcation in relay settings. There has been a work by
Su et al. [74] that introduces the intelligence to detect if
the relay settings can be altered by amplifying the mea-
surements from voltage or current transformers. How-
ever, such an implementation has only considered limited
perspectives of abnormality, which can be reﬁned through
correlations among other local sources. Extension of the
hypotheses is possible.

2) Spatial correlation: This involves properties for the
analysis of events occurring in multiple substations, in
control centers, or at substations and control centers. This
is to ensure a higher security level when a system is
under sophisticated attacks that may lead to signiﬁcant
economic losses and equipment damage.

3) Hybrid correlation: The hybrid approach combines both
temporal and spatial correlations to determine and com-
pare the likelihood of the attacks’ severity. This can reﬁne
the correlation hypothesis, depending on the credibility of
the current conditions from the various sources.

To perform anomaly detection and associated impact analy-
sis, the various system logs of the SCADA network need to be

periodically monitored and correlated. The system logs include
the following:

1) Communication systems: Status of the communication
server to all IEDs, such as communication link failure
(temporary or permanent), or degradation of the expected
throughput. An idle connection that has been made over
the allowed time frame should also be reported. Detection
of DoS by determining the maximum number of connec-
tions allowed by considering the number of simultaneous
connections or at a different time frame. An irregular
frequency and volume of usage on a speciﬁc application
should be included.

2) Computer systems: Alarms of intrusion attempts with
respect to the attempt frequency to each system. The
number of reset, shutdown, or stopping (dead heartbeat)
system applications or controllers, including timestamps
on all relevant events. The system should alert a computer
permanent failure.

The system logs for vulnerability assessment can be obtained
either from real SCADA environments or from a SCADA test-
bed platform that emulates various SCADA functions.

C. Impact Analysis

Impact analysis is the task to analyze the intrusion behaviors
and evaluate the consequences of a cyberattacks on the SCADA
system [76]–[79]. The proposed method is used to assess the
vulnerability of computer networks and power systems, pos-
sibly the potential loss of load in a power system as a result
of a cyberattacks. A compromised cybersecurity of a SCADA
system can cause serious damage to a power system if the attack
is able to launch disruptive switching actions leading to a loss
of load or equipment damage. This is particularly troublesome
if the attack can penetrate the control center network that is
connected to substations under the SCADA system. An inte-
grated risk modeling approach that captures both power control
system vulnerabilities and the resulting impacts on the real-
time operation of the power system was proposed in [80]. The
methodology has the following four key steps.

1) Cybernet: Network that incorporates combinations of
intrusion scenarios into the SCADA system. The cybernet
captures the system conﬁguration, authentication, ﬁrewall
model, and login/password model. The transition rates of
the cybernet are obtained by statistical analysis of system
logs. The steady-state analysis of cybernet provides the
intrusion probability for each scenario.

2) Power ﬂow simulation: The steady-state behavior of a
power system under a cyberattacks can be studied us-
ing intrusion models and power ﬂow simulations. This
evaluation of a power system under cyberattacks can be
performed by isolating the compromised subsystems.
Failure to obtain a power ﬂow solution is an indication of
a major impact that may lead to a power system collapse.
The impact of isolating a substation in the overall system
is measured by an impact factor corresponding to the
substation.

TEN et al.: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

857

3) Vulnerability index calculation: The scenario vulnera-
bility index is computed as the product of steady-state
intrusion probability for the scenario (obtained through
cybernet analysis) and the impact factor of the component
(obtained through power ﬂow simulation). The maximum
among the scenario vulnerability indices is used as the
system vulnerability index.

4) Security improvements: Improve the cybersecurity of the
SCADA system based on vulnerability assessment results
with the available technologies. This improvement can
produce different probabilities that will be used in the
quantitative analysis.

D. Mitigation Strategies

The output of the event correlation and hypothesis formation
shows the risks. The likely scenarios will undergo an impact
analysis to study the severity of risks. If the associated risk
is high in terms of the loss of load [80], equipment damages
(costly devices such as generators and transformers), or other
forms of economic losses, then suitable control actions will
be initiated to prevent/mitigate the risks. The nature of the
prevention/mitigation techniques depends on the following na-
ture of risk: 1) intrusion attempts; 2) intruded scenario; or
3) ongoing DoS attack [68]. In case of an intrusion attempt,
suitable security improvements need to be made at the most
vulnerable components of the system that are associated with
the identiﬁed vulnerability scenario. The most vulnerable com-
ponents of a scenario can be identiﬁed through tracing the path
(sequence of events) in risk modeling. Implementation of the
proposed framework can be evaluated through test-bed studies
to quantify cyber-based vulnerabilities and associated risks in
power systems and to also evaluate the effectiveness of risk mit-
igation under realistic and sophisticated attack scenarios [81]–
[83]. A recovery strategy helps to mitigate the cyberattacks with
self-healing mechanisms [61].

III. ATTACK-TREE MODELING

The contribution of this paper is a new algorithm for eval-
uation of cybersecurity incorporating both password policies
and port auditing. The algorithm has been implemented as a
software prototype. A case study of the proposed algorithm is
simulated and reported in Section V. As shown in the previous
section, impact analysis is a way to evaluate the consequences
of an attack. Attack trees are simpliﬁed methodologies for
impact analysis of a computer network system by identifying
the adversary objectives. The exploitability index introduced in
[63] has associated a system proﬁle with hypotheses. The risk
assessment methodology is based on the relevance and priority
with a list of hypothesized failures, which is formulated in
accordance with the given weight to the probable consequence
events. The proposed methods in this paper provide a similar
framework to identify system dependences of SCADA systems
without including the outage costs.

An attack tree is a graph that connects more than one attack
leaf from each node [84]–[88]. An attack tree may consist of
a multilevel hierarchy in a predecessor–successor structure that
captures the possible ways to achieve subgoals. The top node

Fig. 2. Attack leaves with “AND” and “OR.” (a) Attack leaf with logic operator
“AND.” (b) An attack leaf with logic operator “OR.”

TABLE I

RULES FOR CONDITIONS 1, 2, AND 3

of an attack tree is the ultimate goal with combinations of
subgoals. Each attack leaf may include one or more defense
nodes that are direct successors of the attack leaf. Defense
nodes provide countermeasures. An attack leaf can be an el-
ement of different intrusion scenarios, depending on the node
connectivity associated with it. The predecessors of each attack
leaf are nodes that are attributed with logic operators “AND” or
“OR.” Each predecessor node is speciﬁc for the given leaf node.
Fig. 2 shows attack trees with “AND” and “OR” conﬁgurations.
All leaves leading to an “AND” box will have to be penetrated
in order to move up the attack tree, i.e., a subsystem has been
penetrated. On the other hand, in Fig. 2(b), if one of the attack
leaves is penetrated, it is sufﬁcient to move up the attack tree.

A. Introduction to the Methodology

A cybersecurity vulnerability index is a measure of the
likelihood that an attack tree or attack leaf will be compromised
by hackers. Each attack leaf may have weaknesses that are
prone to attacks. The vulnerability index ranges from 0 to 1,
from the most invulnerable (0 value) to the most vulnerable
(1 value). There are separate vulnerability indices for each
attack leaf and each intrusion scenario. There is also an overall
system vulnerability index. All indices range from 0 to 1.

A vulnerability index is determined based on the following
factors: 1) evidence of attempted intrusions; 2) existing coun-
termeasures and improved countermeasures; and 3) password
policy enforcement. The vulnerability index is evaluated with
the hypothesis listed in Table I. Three conditions are deﬁned in
Table I. Condition 1 states that there is no evidence to suggest
that there are intrusion attempts for the system. Condition 1 is
not met when there are credible pieces of evidence of malicious
attempts based on electronic data. Condition 2 is met when there
are one or more countermeasures implemented for an attack
leaf. Any technology that is applied to defend the attack leaf
would satisfy condition 2. An example is a web server installed
with a ﬁrewall that monitors the access to prevent malicious
intrusions through online trafﬁc. Password implementation for
each attack leaf is considered for assessment. Poor password
practices result in unauthorized access. A system can face the
risks of unauthorized access, even though it may be password
protected. Conditions 2 and 3 may inﬂuence condition 1.

858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

reduce access from anonymous users. This would reduce at-
tempted intrusions and enhance system security. Detection of a
potential intrusion attempt but without reinforcing at least one
password policy results in χ = 0.67, i.e., true for conditions
1 and 3 but not for condition 2. The other example is that
condition 3, with stronger password policies, would also protect
the system from being compromised (in this case, it would be
χ = 0.33 as only condition 1 is true). However, this does not
change the number of attempts.

B. Evaluation of Vulnerability Indices

This section is concerned with the cybersecurity vulnerability
of an attack tree. There are four steps to assess the security
vulnerability: 1) identifying the intrusion scenarios; 2) evalu-
ating vulnerability indices for the system, intrusion scenarios,
and attack leaves; 3) port auditing; and 4) password strength
evaluation.

1) Identifying the Intrusion Scenarios From the Attack Tree:
First, the intrusion scenarios from the attack tree are identiﬁed.
Then, the possible intrusion scenarios are enumerated. Each of
the intrusion scenarios is the combination of attack leaves that
are formed with “AND” or “OR” attributes conﬁgured in the
attack tree. The leaf vulnerability index v(Gk) of each attack
leaf is evaluated once all the intrusion scenarios are determined.
The scenario vulnerability is the product of the corresponding
attack leaf vulnerabilities.

2) Evaluating Vulnerability Indices: There are three secu-
rity vulnerability indices: 1) system vulnerability; 2) scenario
vulnerability; and 3) leaf vulnerability. The system vulnerabil-
ity (VS) is the vulnerability of an attack tree determined from
the scenario vulnerability, as shown in (1). K is the total number
of intrusion scenarios. A vector of scenario vulnerabilities is
given in (2), where I = {i1, i2, . . . , iK} is a set of intrusion
scenarios. The index VS is the maximum value over the scenario
vulnerability set. Each intrusion scenario is a possibility that
leads to successful penetration of the system. The vulnerability
of a scenario is the product of leaf vulnerabilities, where
each scenario vulnerability is formed with a different subset
of S. Scenario vulnerability indices are given in (2), where
s1, s2, . . . , sk ∈ S and S = {1, 2, . . . , n}

···

Vs = max (V(I))

(cid:5)
V(I) = (V (i1) V (i2)
(cid:5)
j∈s1 v(Gj)
j∈s2 v(Gj)
(cid:5)
...

V (i1) =
V (i2) =

⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎝

⎞
V (iK))
⎟⎟⎟⎠ .

(cid:6)

(1)

(2)

=

V (iK) =

j∈sK

v(Gj)

A leaf vulnerability is evaluated by incorporating the
strengths of the implemented countermeasures, such as auditing
the ports vα and password combination vβ in a computer. The
cybersecurity condition χ must be identiﬁed ﬁrst. The basis for
evaluation is to predetermine the leaf vulnerability condition
with respect to the evidence of attempted intrusions, technolog-
ical countermeasures, and password policy enforcement, which
was discussed in Section IV-A. Password policies and port
auditing on computer systems are important elements of the

Fig. 3. Procedure to evaluate vulnerability indices.

IV. VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT OF CYBERSECURITY

The procedure to evaluate vulnerability indices is shown in
Fig. 3. As shown in the ﬁgure, the procedure starts with an
analysis of the attack objectives. Then, the attack tree and coun-
termeasures are established. The system vulnerability index is
obtained by evaluating the scenario vulnerability and the leaf
vulnerability for the selected scenarios and the corresponding
attack leaves. This section describes the procedure to evalu-
ate the vulnerability indices: 1) cybersecurity conditions and
2) evaluation of vulnerability indices.

A. Cybersecurity Conditions

This section evaluates the cybersecurity conditions (χ),
which is a preliminary evaluation before the speciﬁc vulnera-
bility indices related to leaves and scenarios are calculated. The
cybersecurity condition assessment is based on technological
countermeasures and enforcement of the password policy.

The cybersecurity condition is measured by a number χ,
which assumes the value of 0.33, 0.67, or 1. A low value
indicates that the system condition is invulnerable, while the
value 1 indicates that the system is vulnerable.

1) χ = 0.33: If [(Condition 1) AND (Condition 2) AND
(Condition 3)], then = 0.33 → All conditions in Table I
are satisﬁed. Advanced countermeasures are deployed,
and comprehensive password policies are enforced. There
is no evidence that the system is subject to malicious
attempts.
2) χ = 0.67: If (cid:3) [(Condition 1) AND (Condition 2)] OR
[(Condition 1) AND (Condition 3)] OR [(Condition 2)
AND (Condition 3)] (cid:4), then = 0.67 → Any two of the
conditions in Table I are satisﬁed.
3) χ = 1.00: If ([(Condition 1) OR (Condition 2) OR (Con-
dition 3)] OR (None of the conditions)], then = 1.00 →
Only one or none of the conditions is met.

For instance, implementation of the new technological coun-
termeasures can reduce the likelihood of intrusions. Applying
boundary protection in a ﬁrewall with a set of rules can also

TEN et al.: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

859

proposed analytical method. In this model, both elements are
combined for assessment of the leaf vulnerability

v(G) = χ · max(cid:3)vα, vβ(cid:4).

(3)

The leaf vulnerability index is the maximum value between

port and password vulnerability.

3) Port Auditing: Port auditing ensures that a computer
system is free from malicious threats that can lead to a system
compromise. This includes local security checks, root access,
remote ﬁle access, default account, Trojan horse, worm, or
possible backdoor. In the vulnerability test, the vulnerability of
the port is categorized into four levels, i.e., high, medium, low,
and relevant. The high risk level indicates that the system can be
in damage, particularly if it can be used to breach the integrity
of the system, or possibly resulting in a DoS attack that brings
down the system. The medium risk level has inappropriate data
or ﬁles in the system, which may be used for a subsequent
attack in the system. The low risk level is typically not severe
and can only serve as a conjunction to other vulnerability
risk that may lead to a security breach. The relevant level
is not classiﬁed as risky, but for informational purposes, the
system administrator should determine if there are malicious
indications. The weighted sum of port risk factor is deﬁned as

c =

ni · ωi.

(4)

(cid:9)
i∈I

Classiﬁcation of risk factor is weighted in accordance with
the level of severity ωi, where each level carries a certain weight
of risk factor to the number of ﬁndings ni. The port vulnerabil-
ity vα can be normalized by σ, which is obtained from a set of c

vα = c
σ

(5)

where σ denotes the historical worst case among all audits.
The weighting factors ω1, ω2, . . . , ω4 for each deﬁned level are
assigned to 1, 0.75, 0.5, and 0.25, respectively.

4) Password Strength Evaluation: Password strength is de-
termined by the total combination of character types and
its length. The strength of password vulnerability can be
measured as

sβ = CL

(6)
where C is the combination of character types and L is the
length of a password. The strongest password strength deters or
prolongs the cracking process. Neither brute-force trials nor so-
cial engineering techniques can break through in a short period.
For instance, a numeric combination of ten can be improved
with additional 52 alphabetical combinations (capital and small
letters). This would strengthen the password to prevent the
dictionary way of password cracking. In addition, password
policies can be enforced with minimum length, password age,

Fig. 4. Piecewise between the deﬁned si and si−1.

and password combination. The password vulnerability vβ is
deﬁned as

vβ = max(cid:3)1 − rβ(cid:4)

(7)

where rβ is the mapping of sβ between 0 and 1 representing the
set of total accounts on a computer system. Since the mapping
of rβ depends on risk classiﬁcation, a piecewise linear function
for the range of each classiﬁcation is derived. Supposing that a
linear function is deﬁned in (8), where a denotes the slope of a
piece and b denotes the interception at the y-axis

rβ = a · sβ + b.

(8)

sβ is the combination of password that maps to the strength of
password deﬁned at the y-axis (shown in Fig. 4). The symbol
rβ is the mapping point of sβ. The slope of every piece of linear
function can be determined as

a = ri − ri−1
si − si−1

.

(9)

The interception of the point b is generalized as follows:

ri = ri − ri−1
si − si−1

si + b ⇒ b = ri−1 · si − ri · si−1

si − si−1

.

(10)

In general, it can be expressed in (11), shown at the bottom

of the page.

5) Evaluating Security Improvements: Security improve-
ment can be achieved by a replacement or additional coun-
termeasures. The improvement for an attack leaf and intrusion
scenario can be measured with the implementation of defense
(cid:8)(i), respectively, for the leaf and
nodes denoted as v
scenario vulnerability after an improvement is implemented.
The degree of improvement for a leaf vulnerability is given by
|(v
(cid:8)(G) − v(G)/v(G)) × 100%| and similarly for the scenario
improvement.

(cid:8)(G) and V

⎧⎨
⎩

rβ =

(cid:13)
0,

1,

ri−ri−1
si−si−1

(cid:14)

sβ + ri−1·si−ri·si−1

si−si−1

,

if sβ < s0
if si−1 ≤ sβ < si,
if sβ ≥ sn,

where ri+1 > ri,
sj > sj−1,

j = 1, 2, . . . , n

r0 = 0,

i = 1, 2, . . . , n − 1

(11)

860

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

V. CASE STUDY: INTRUSION MODELING

USING AN ATTACK TREE

TABLE II

RISK VULNERABILITY EVALUATION AND NUMBER OF

PASSWORDS ON COMPUTER NETWORK SYSTEMS

The methodology proposed in the previous section is applied
to the study cases in this section. The purpose is to identify the
access points of power system control networks and evaluate
the network vulnerability. The objective of the proposed attack
tree is focused on the ports and passwords of the computer
systems on the control networks, e.g., substation or process
control networks with virtual private network connection. The
case study is to ensure the following.

1) All of the computer ports are evaluated (to ensure that

there is no worm, Trojan horse, or spyware).

2) The strength of password is high with a good combination

of character types to prevent intrusions.

3) System vulnerability is within the reasonable range rela-

tive to each scenario vulnerability.

The case study is based on the computer networks set up at
Iowa State University. A total of 43 computer systems orga-
nized in ﬁve subnets, emulating subnets of electric power con-
trol networks, are evaluated based on the proposed methodology.
Although all networks are protected by ﬁrewalls, they are

distinctive in roles, technologies, and architecture.

1) Primary control center: This is a wide-area control that
consists of real-time communication servers, EMS appli-
cation servers, and relational databases. These servers are
highly redundant systems with additional servers as slave
mode; failover in case of unforeseen failures.

2) Backup control center: It has identical settings, conﬁg-
urations, and system architecture as the primary control
center that serves as “site-backup” mode for disastrous
coordination in case of a primary center failure. It pe-
riodically updates the latest databases of the primary
control center through ICCP servers for real-time data ex-
change, including real-time and historical power system
information.

3) Substation: An Ethernet-based peer-to-peer communica-
tion within the substation, linking the instrumental de-
vices, e.g., IP-based IEDs, to the substation computer.
The main role of substation control is within the sub-
station. The computer in the substation also serves as a
server that sends real-time data to other networks and
receives control commands from the control center.

4) Power plant: The power plant is deployed with high
redundancy for data reliability purposes within the net-
work. The power plant network involves complex process
control and monitoring functions. It is a high-speed and
large capacity network that acquires real-time data from
physical devices, e.g., boiler or gas turbine.

5) Web-based SCADA: It is a portal page of user interfaces
that manages the municipal (smaller) control network,
in which data reliability and backup are maintained by
third-party vendors. It is a client–server technology that
provides same role as a control center.

The evaluation is performed from a server outside the cam-
pus’ network to determine the vulnerability of the machines and
how effective the boundary protection is. Since each computer
has been exhaustively scanned through the ports, i.e., 65 535

combinations and speciﬁc vulnerability tests, the time required
for each machine ranges from 5 to 9 h. The setup of the studies
includes different platforms to ensure that local security checks
are covered in the test. Tests for DoS are also included in the
evaluation. Table II shows the risk vulnerability assessment on
43 computer systems distributed in the control network. This
evaluation shows the number of ﬁndings that is grouped in
each category, i.e., high, medium, low, and relevant, with more
than 10 000 vulnerabilities scanned. For instance, potential high
and medium risk levels associated to each backdoor and DoS
shown in the table are detected in 1.1.5.3. It appears that the
backdoor can be accessed through ports 5800 and 5900. The
detection of DoS can crash a service by sending a single long
text line that crashes a software module. Lower risk factors
include traceroute from a scanning server and other unknown
services that are detected as nonmalicious. By going through
similar evaluations on each computer system, the worst case
index σ = 5.75 is obtained. Aside from backdoors that pose
the threat of a computer network system, accessing the control
network with administrative privilege passwords is one way that
can access the SCADA system. To harden intrusion attempts,

TEN et al.: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

861

PASSWORD COMBINATION AND ITS VULNERABILITY OF IP 1.1.1.1

TABLE III

a set of administrative passwords are randomly generated for
the case study for evaluation of their password strengths. This
also incorporates the existence of factory default password
and insufﬁcient security improvement [52]. The last column of
Table II shows the number of passwords associated with each
computer system generated. Equation (12) shows the piecewise
functions to determine rβ, where the increment of ri is 0.25 for
each level. The strength of password that is “difﬁcult to crack”
(si) has been given as 1000, 1 × 1015, 1 × 1020, 1 × 1035, and
1 × 1050. Table III shows a set of passwords that can be used to
access IP 1.1.1.1. It tabulates the combination of each password
and its vulnerability level for each password. Equation (7)
is used to determine vβ which is 1. Comparison with vα is
necessary to determine the maximum value. This maximum
value will be multiplied with the precondition of cybersecurity
to determine v(G)

0,
2.5×10−16sβ,
2.5×10−21sβ +0.25,
2.5×10−36sβ +0.5,
2.5×10−51sβ +0.75,
1,

if sβ <1000
if 1000≤ sβ <1×1015
if 1×1015≤ sβ <1×1020
if 1×1020≤ sβ <1×1035
if 1 1035≤ sβ <1×1050
if sβ ≥1×1050.

(12)

⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

rβ=

An attack tree shown in Fig. 5 demonstrates the network
relationship between a power plant, a substation, a web-based
SCADA, and the primary and backup control centers. The
formulation of the attack tree is based upon the abstraction of
the power control networks that is monitored through control
systems. These combinations may result in an intrusion into the
control center. To derive the scenario combination, groups of
attack leaves are arranged as follows:

⎛
Group 1 : (G13 × G14 × ··· × G17)
⎝ G22 × G23 × ··· × G26

⎞
⎠
Group 2 :
Group 3 : (Group 2 × Group 4 × Group 5
⎞
⎟⎠

G27 × G28
G29 × G30
× G1 × ··· × G10)
G31 × G32
G33 × G34 × ··· × G36
G37 × G38

Group 4 :

⎛
⎜⎝
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

G39

.

G40 × G41
G42 × G43

Group 5 :

Each group represents the computer systems of a subnetwork
from a power plant, substation networks, and a web-based
SCADA system. Group 1 represents the disruption of the web-
based SCADA system, where security breaches in a web server
may be exploited by intruders. Groups 2 and 3 represent a

disruption of the backup control center and real-time services in
the primary control center. The importance of a backup control
center is to continue functions of the primary control cen-
ter under extreme circumstances. Communication, relational
database, and real-time application services in control centers
are critical elements. Groups 4 and 5 represent a disruption
of power plant operations and substation automation. Security
breaches in these groups may also result in penetration into the
control center. Each intrusion scenario is derived from attack
leaves, where G1, G2, . . . , G43 are attack leaves. Intrusion sce-
narios are expressed as follows:

(cid:18)

i=13,14,...,17

i=1,2,...,12,22,23,...,26,31,32

i=1,2,...,12,22,23,...,26,33,34,...,36

i=1,2,...,12,22,23,...,26,37,38

i=1,2,...,12,22,23,...,26,39

i=1,2,...,12,27,28,26,31,32

i=1,2,...,12,27,28,26,33,34,...,36

i=1,2,...,12,27,28,26,37,38

i=1,2,...,12,27,28,26,39

i=1,2,...,12,29,30,31,32

Gi → i2

Gi → i3

Gi → i4

Gi → i5
Gi → i6

Gi → i7

Gi → i8

Gi → i9
Gi → i10

Gi → i11

Gi → i1(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)

(13)

i=1,2,...,12,29,30,33,34,...,36

Gi → i12

Gi → i13

i=1,2,...,12,29,30,37,38

i=1,2,...,12,29,30,39

i=1,2,...,12,22,23,...,26,40,41

i=1,2,...,12,22,23,...,26,42,43

Gi → i14
Gi → i15

i=1,2,...,12,27,28,40,41

i=1,2,...,12,27,28,42,43

i=1,2,...,12,29,30,40,41

Gi → i16
Gi → i17
Gi → i18
Gi → i19.

(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)
(cid:18)

i=1,2,...,12,29,30,42,43

The preconditions of cybersecurity (χ) for all systems are
determined with 1.00, except for IPs 1.1.1.4, 1.1.1.8, 1.1.2.3,
1.1.4.2, 1.1.4.9, and 1.1.5.6 that are determined with 0.67.

862

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

Fig. 5. Attack Tree of the Power System Control Framework.

Fig. 6. Leaf vulnerability with implemented and improved countermeasures. (a) Leaf vulnerability. (b) Vulnerability improvement for each attack leaf.

(cid:8)(G) are computed in accordance with the con-
v(G) and v
ﬁguration of the attack tree. The leaf vulnerability and its
improvement are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). Since the password
combination in the set reveals a weakness, a password policy
with at least eight characters and four different character types
has been enforced for security improvement. This has resulted
in improvement of preconditions to 0.67 or, even better, 0.33.
The factory default passwords have been replaced with stronger

passwords, and the ﬁndings on high and medium categories
of risk factor for each system have been removed. Overall,
this has also lowered all of the leaf vulnerabilities shown in
Fig. 6(b). Among which, v(G30) has been improved the most
with 84.37%. Improvement in all cases has been archived at
the level of at least 50%. Also, eliminating the factory default
password and guest account reduced the leaf vulnerability. In
(cid:8)(I) are evaluated using (2). Each
the next step, V (I) and V

TEN et al.: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

863

REFERENCES

[1] J. Eisenhauer, P. Donnelly, M. Ellis, and M. O’Brien. (2006, Jan.).
Roadmap to Secure Control Systems in the Energy Sector. [Online].
Available: http://www.controlsystemsroadmap.net/pdfs/roadmap.pdf

[2] Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Systems, Nat. Com-
mun. Syst., Arlington, VA, Oct. 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.
ncs.gov/library/tech_bulletins/2004/tib_04-1.pdf

[3] Critical infrastructure protection report, Government Accountability Of-
ﬁce, Washington, DC, May 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.gao.
gov/new.items/d05434.pdf

[4] Challenges and Efforts to Secure Control Systems, Government Ac-
countability Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, Mar. 2004. [Online]. Available:
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04354.pdf

[5] M. R. Permann and K. Rohde, Cyber Assessment Methods for SCADA
Security, Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrum. Soc. Amer. [Online].
Available:
http://www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/Cyber_
Assessment_Methods_for_SCADA_Security_Mays_ISA_Paper.pdf

[6] R. E. Carlson, J. E. Dagle, S. A. Shamsuddin, and R. P. Evans,
A Summary of Control System Security Standards Activities in the
Energy Sector, DC: U.S. Dept. Energy, Ofﬁce Electricity Delivery
Energy Reliab., Nat. SCADA Test Bed (NSTB), Oct. 2005. [Online].
Available:
http://www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/Control_
System_Security_Standards_Activities.pdf

[7] Information Security: Technologies to Secure Federal Systems, Mar. 2004,
Report to Congressional Requesters, GAO-04-467. [Online]. Available:
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04467.pdf

[8] M. Amin, “Security challenges for

the electricity infrastructure,”

Computer, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 8–10, Apr. 2002.

[9] J. D. McDonald, Power Substations Engineering, 2nd ed. Boca Raton,

FL: CRC Press, May 30, 2007.

[10] J. Salmeron, K. Wood, and R. Baldick, “Analysis of electric grid security
under terrorist threat,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 905–
912, May 2004.

[11] R. A. Leon, V. Vittal, and G. Manimaran, “Application of sensor network
for secure electric energy infrastructure,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 1021–1028, Apr. 2007.

[12] A. G. Bruce and R. Lee, “A framework for the speciﬁcation of SCADA
data links,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 560–564,
Feb. 1994.

[13] R. L. Krutz, Securing SCADA Systems, 1st ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley,

Nov. 28, 2005.

[14] Q. Liu, J.-N. Hwang, and C.-C. Liu, “Communication infrastructure for
wide area protection of power systems,” in Proc. Power Syst. Commun.
Infrastructures Future, Beijing, China, Sep. 2002.

[15] C.-L. Su, C.-N. Lu, and T.-Y. Hsiao, “Simulation study of Internet based
inter control center data exchange for complete network modeling,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1177–1183, Nov. 2002.

[16] K. Schneider, C.-C. Liu, and J.-P. Paul, “Assessment of interactions
between power and telecommunications infrastructures,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1123–1130, Aug. 2006.

[17] T. Mander, F. Nabhani, L. Wang, and R. Cheung, “Data object based
security for DNP3 over TCP/IP for increased utility commercial aspects
security,” in Proc. IEEE Power Eng. Soc. Gen. Meeting, Jun. 24–28, 2007,
pp. 1–8.

[18] M. Adamiak and W. Premerlani, “The role of utility communications in
a deregulated environment,” in Proc. 32nd HICSS, 1999, vol. Track3,
p. 3026.

[19] M. Amin and B. F. Wollenberg, “Toward a smart grid: Power delivery
for the 21st century,” IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 34–41,
Sep./Oct. 2005.

[20] F. F. Wu, K. Moslehi, and A. Bose, “Power system control centers:
Past, present, and future,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 93, no. 11, pp. 1890–1908,
Nov. 2005.

[21] Vulnerability Assessment Methodology for Electric Power Infrastructure,
U.S. Dept. Energy, Ofﬁce Energy Assurance, Washington DC,
Sep. 30, 2002.

[22] C.-W. Ten, C.-C. Liu, and G. Manimaran, “Vulnerability assessment of
cybersecurity for SCADA systems using attack trees,” in Proc. IEEE
Power Eng. Soc. Gen. Meeting, Tampa, FL, Jun. 24–28, 2007, pp. 1–8.

[23] T. D. Nelson, “Mitigations for security vulnerabilities found in control
system networks,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Joint ISA POWID/EPRI Controls
Instrum. Conf., 2006, pp. 1–12.

[24] C.-W. Ten, G. Manimaran, and C.-C. Liu, “Cybersecurity for electric
power control and automation systems,” in Proc. eNetworks Cyberengi-
neering Workshop, IEEE-SMC, Montreal, QC, Canada, Oct. 7–10, 2007,
pp. 29–34.

7. Scenario

Fig.
countermeasures.

vulnerability with

implemented

and

improved

intrusion scenario is the product of attack leaves. The scenario
vulnerability is shown in Fig. 7. Note that a logarithmic scale
(cid:8)(I).
is used to highlight the difference between V (I) and V
The improvement of i1 is 92.11%. The remaining values are
close to 100%. The system vulnerability has been improved
from 0.0306 to 0.0024.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Cybersecurity for critical infrastructures is an emerging area
that requires extensive new research. The comprehensive liter-
ature survey reported in this paper has identiﬁed the lack of re-
search in some areas. New research needs to be done in each of
the components of the RAIM framework, such as the following:
1) SCADA-system-speciﬁc real-time correlation and intrusion
detection algorithms; 2) online risk monitoring and mitigation
algorithms capturing both cyber system vulnerabilities and the
resulting consequences; 3) advanced modeling techniques that
capture the dynamic nature of the attacker behavior, as well as
the system behavior; and 4) advanced modeling that accounts
for impacts such as load loss, loss due to equipment damage,
and economic loss. Vulnerability assessment can be performed
periodically, and the validation of the proposed framework
can be conducted through test-bed development. For instance,
the components include instrumenting logs (both power equip-
ment logs and computer system logs), real-time monitoring
of logs, event correlations and hypothesis formation, what-
if impact analysis, and proactive/mitigation countermeasures
to restore a power system. The proposed methodology using
attack trees provides a simpliﬁed way to hypothetically eval-
uate the system vulnerability level. This paper can be further
extended by considering the reduction of system vulnerability
within a budgetary limit. Efﬁcient delivery of information from
substations or control centers may be needed to help power
system dispatchers identify critical messages quickly. Various
techniques for visualization of the system health, in terms of
vulnerability level and other critical information, are desirable.

864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART A: SYSTEMS AND HUMANS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2010

[25] M. Naedele, D. Dzung, and M. Stanimirov, “Network security for sub-
station automation systems,” in SAFECOMP, U. Voges, Ed. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 25–34.

[26] T. S. Sidhu and Y. Yin, “Modeling and simulation for performance evalua-
tion of IEC61850-based substation communication systems,” IEEE Trans.
Power Del., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1482–1489, Jul. 2007.

[27] P. Baybutt, “Cybersecurity risk analysis for process control systems using
rings of protection analysis (ROPA),” Process Safety Progr., vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 284–290, Dec. 2004, PrimaTech Tech. Rep.

[28] N. Ye, J. Giordano, and J. Feldman, “A process control approach to cyber

attack detection,” Commun. ACM, vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 76–82, Aug. 2001.

[29] J.-W. Park and J.-M. Lee, “Transmission modeling and simulation
for Internet-based control,” in Proc. IEEE 27th IECON, Nov. 2001,
pp. 165–169.

[30] A. Miller, “Trends in process control systems security,” IEEE Secur.

Privacy, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 57–60, Sep. 2005.

[31] C. DeMarco and Y. Braden, “Threats to electric power grid security
through hacking of networked generation control,” in Proc. 3rd CRIS,
Alexandria, VA, Sep. 2006.

[32] X. Wu, D. Zhang, and K. Wang, “Palm line extraction and matching
for personal authentication,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. A, Syst.,
Humans, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 978–987, Sep. 2006.

[33] S. A. Klein and J. N. Menendez, “Information security considerations
in open system architectures,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 224–230, Feb. 1993.

[34] G. N. Ericsson and A. Torkilseng, “Management of information se-
curity for an electric power utility—On security domains and use of
ISO/IEC17799 standard,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 683–690, Apr. 2005.

[35] T.-Y. Chen, Y.-M. Chen, and C.-B. Wang, “A formal virtual enterprise
access control model,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. A, Syst., Humans,
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 832–851, Jul. 2008.

[36] T. Brown, “Security in SCADA systems: How to handle the growing
menace to process automation,” IEE Comput. Control Eng., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 42–47, Jun. 2005.

[37] F. Sheldon, S. Batsell, S. Prowell, and M. Langston, “Assessment and
remediation of vulnerabilities in the SCADA and process control systems
of utilities,” Internet Security Systems (white paper), 2005.

[38] F. Cleveland, “IEC TC57 security standards for power system’s infor-
mation infrastructure—Beyond simple encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Power
Eng. Soc. Gen. Meeting, Tampa, FL, Jun. 24–28, 2007, pp. 1079–1087.

[39] Z. Xie, G. Manimaran, V. Vittal, A. G. Phadke, and V. Centeno, “An infor-
mation architecture for future power system and its reliability analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 857–863, Aug. 2002.

[40] C. H. Hauser, D. E. Bakken, and A. Bose, “A failure to communicate,”

IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 47–55, Mar./Apr. 2005.

[41] Attack

trends, Carnegie Mellon Comput. Emergency Response
Team/Center Coordination (CERT/CC), Pittsburgh, PA, 2002. [Online].
Available: http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/attack_trends.pdf

[42] S. McClure, J. Scambray, and G. Kurtz, Hacking Exposed: Network Secu-

rity Secrets and Solutions, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003.

[43] M. Amin, “North America’s electricity infrastructure: Are we ready for
more perfect storms?” IEEE Secur. Privacy, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 19–25,
Sep./Oct. 2003.

[44] R. Richardson, “2007 CSI computer crime and security survey,” in Proc.

12th Annu. Comput. Crime Security Survey, 2007, pp. 1–28.

[45] E. Goetz, “Cybersecurity of the electric power industry,” in Report of
Investigative Research for Infrastructure Assurance (IRIA). Hanover,
NH: Inst. Security Technol. Studies, Dartmouth College, Dec. 2002.

[46] F. Sheldon, S. Batsell, S. Prowell, and M. Langston, Control Systems
Cybersecurity Awareness. Washington DC: U.S. Comput. Emergency
Readiness Team (CERT), Jul. 25, 2005, pp. 1–10.

[47] J. Tang, R. Hovsapian, M. Sloderbeck, J. Langston, R. Meeker,
P. McLaren, D. Becker, B. Richardson, M. Baca, J. Trent, Z. Hartley,
R. Parks, and S. Smith, “The CAPS-SNL power system security test bed,”
in Proc. 3rd CRIS, Alexandria, VA, Sep. 2006.

[48] G. Dondossola, F. Garrone, J. Szanto, and G. Fiorenza, “Emerging in-
formation technology scenarios for the control and management of the
distribution grid,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Exhib. Elect. Distrib., Vienna,
Austria, Mar. 21–24, 2007.

[49] J. M. Weiss, “Control systems cybersecurity–maintaining the reliability
of the critical infrastructure,” Testimony of Joseph M. Weiss Control
Systems Cybersecurity Expert before the House Government Reform
Committee’s Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, Inter-
governmental Relations, and the Census U.S. House of Representatives,
Mar. 30, 2004.

[50] F. Sheldon, S. Batsell, S. Prowell, and M. Langston, Cryptographic Pro-
tection of SCADA Communications—Part 1: Background, Policies and
Test Plan. Washington, DC: American Gas Assoc., Sep. 7, 2005.

[51] NERC Tech. Rep. Cybersecurity Standards.

[Online]. Available:

http://www.nerc.com/ﬁlez/standards/Cyber-Security-Permanent.html

[52] User Manual

for the Workshop, North Amer. Electric Rel. Coun-
cil (NERC), Minneapolis, MN, Sep. 2006. Cybersecurity Standards
Workshop

[53] A. Torkilseng and G. Ericsson, “Some guidelines for developing a frame-
work for managing cybersecurity for an electric power utility,” ELECTRA
Report—JWG D2/B3/C2.01, Oct. 2006.

[54] D. M. Nicol, W. H. Sanders, and K. S. Trivedi, “Model-based evaluation
from dependability to security,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Com-
put., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 48–65, Jan. 2004.

[55] W. L. McGill and B. M. Ayyub, “The meaning of vulnerability in the
context of critical infrastructure protection,” in Critical Infrastructure
Protection: Elements of Risk. Arlington, VA: School of Laws, George
Mason Univ., Dec. 2007.

[56] J. Depoy, J. Phelan, P. Sholander, B. Smith, G. Varnado, and G. Wyss,
“Risk assessment for physical and cyber-attacks on critical infrastruc-
tures,” in Proc. IEEE MILCOM, Oct. 17–20, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1961–1969.
[57] S. Kumar, “Classiﬁcation and detection of computer intrusions,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Dept. Comput. Sci., Purdue Univ., West Lafayette, IN,
Aug. 1995.

[58] Y. Xie, “A spatiotemporal event correlation approach to computer secu-
rity,” Ph.D. dissertation, School Comput. Sci., Carnegie Mellon Univ.,
Pittsburgh, PA, Aug. 2005, (CMU-CS-05-175).

[59] K. Lye and J. Wing, “Game strategies in network security,” in Proc. Work-
shop Foundations Comput. Secur., Copenhagen, Denmark, 2002, pp. 1–2.
[60] F. Sheldon, T. Potok, A. Krings, and P. Oman, “Critical energy infrastruc-
ture survivability, inherent limitations, obstacles, and mitigation strate-
gies,” Int. J. Power Energy Syst., no. 2, pp. 86–92, 2004.

[61] F. Sheldon, S. Batsell, S. Prowell, and M. A. Langston, “Position
statement: Methodology to support dependable survivable cyber-secure
infrastructure,” in Proc. 38th Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., 2005, vol. 9,
pp. 1–10.

[62] G. Dondossola, G. Deconinck, F. D. Giandomenico, S. Donatelli,
M. Kaaniche, and P. Verissimo, “Critical utility infrastructural re-
silience,” in Proc. Complex Netw. Infrastructure Protection, Rome, Italy,
Mar. 28–29, 2006.

[63] G. Dondossola, O. Lamquet, and A. Torkilseng, “Key issues and re-
lated methodologies in the security risk analysis and evaluation of elec-
tric power control systems,” in Proc. CIGRÉ Session, Study Committee
D2 Inf., Telecommun. Telecontrol Syst. Elect. Power Ind., Paris, France,
Sep. 2006.

[64] S. Evans, D. Heinbuch, E. Kyle, J. Piorkowski, and J. Wallner, “Risk-
based systems security engineering: Stopping attacks with intention,”
IEEE Secur. Privacy, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 59–62, Nov./Dec. 2004.

[65] S. M. Rinaldi, J. P. Peerenboom, and T. K. Kelly, “Identifying, under-
standing, and analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies,” IEEE
Control Syst. Mag., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 11–25, Dec. 2001.

[66] S. E. Schechter, “Toward econometric models of the security risk from
remote attack,” IEEE Secur. Privacy, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 40–44, Jan. 2005.
[67] S. Bistarelli, F. Fioravanti, and P. Peretti, “Defense trees for economic

evaluation of security investments,” in Proc. ARES, 2006, pp. 416–423.

[68] M. Long, C.-H. Wu, and J. Y. Hung, “Denial of service attacks on
network-based control system: Impact and mitigation,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inf., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 85–96, May 2005.

[69] X. Luo, R. Chang, and E. Chan, “Performance analysis of TCP/AQM
under denial-of-service attacks,” in Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Symp. Modeling,
Anal., Simul. Comput. Telecommun. Syst., Sep. 27–29, 2005, pp. 97–104.
[70] D. S. Yeung, S. Jin, and X. Wang, “Covariance-matrix modeling and
detecting various ﬂooding attacks,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. A,
Syst., Humans, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 157–169, Mar. 2007.

[71] J. Bigham, D. A. O. Gamez, X. Jin, J. Rodaway, C. Phillips, and L. Titkov,
“Safeguarding electricity cyber-infrastructures against the worm threat,”
in Proc. 2nd CRIS, Grenoble, France, Oct. 25–27, 2004.

[72] S. Nadjm-Tehrani, S. Burschka, K. Burbeck, and T. Chyssler, “Safeguard-
ing information infrastructures: Alarm reduction and anomaly detection,”
in Proc. 2nd CRIS, Grenoble, France, Oct. 25–27, 2004.

[73] Y. Zhang, M. Ilic, and O. Tonguz, “Application of support vector machine
classiﬁcation to enhanced protection relay logic in electric power grids,”
in Proc. LESCOPE, Montreal, QC, Canada, Oct. 10–12, 2007, pp. 31–38.
[74] S. Su, W.-L. Chan, K.-K. Li, X. Duan, and X. Zeng, “Context information-
based cybersecurity defense of protection system,” IEEE Trans. Power
Del., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1477–1481, Jul. 2007.

TEN et al.: CYBERSECURITY FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

865

Govindarasu Manimaran (M’99–SM’10) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineer-
ing from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras,
India, in 1998.

He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Iowa State University (ISU). His research expertise
is in the areas of resource management in real-time
systems and networks, overlay networks, network
security, and their applications to critical infrastruc-
tures such as the electric grid. He has published over
100 peer-reviewed research publications. He is the coauthor of the book entitled
Resource Management in Real-Time Systems and Networks (MIT Press, 2001).
Dr. Manimaran received the Young Engineering Research Faculty Award
at ISU in 2003. He has given tutorials on Internet infrastructure security in
conferences, such as the IEEE Infocom 2004 and IEEE ComSoc Tutorials Now
(2004), and served as Workshop Cochair, Symposium Cochair, and Session
Chair on many occasions.

Chen-Ching Liu (F’94) received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of California, Berkeley.

He is currently a Professor of power systems
with the School of Electrical, Electrionic and Me-
chanical Engineering, University College Dublin,
National University of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. He
was the Palmer Chair Professor of Electrical and
Computer Engineering with Iowa State University.
During 1983–2005, he was a Professor of electri-
cal engineering with the University of Washington,
Seattle, where he also served as the Associate Dean

of Engineering from 2000 to 2005.

Dr. Liu received the IEEE Third Millennium Medal in 2000 and the IEEE
Power Engineering Society Outstanding Power Engineering Educator Award in
2004. He was the Chair of the Technical Committee on Power System Analysis,
Computing, and Economics of the IEEE Power Engineering Society.

[75] G. A. Wang, H. Chen, J. J. Xu, and H. Atabakhsh, “Automatically detect-
ing criminal identity deception: An adaptive detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. A, Syst., Humans, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 988–999,
Sep. 2006.

[76] E. Jonsson and T. Olovsson, “A quantitative model of the security intru-
sion process based on attacker behavior,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 235–245, Apr. 1997.

[77] N. Ye, Y. Zhang, and C. M. Borror, “Robustness of the markov-chain
model for cyber-attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 116–123, Mar. 2004.

[78] L. Lavalle, C. Balducelli, and G. Vicoli, “A CBR-based algorithm to
monitor and information intensive critical infrastructure,” in Proc. 2nd
CRIS, Grenoble, France, Oct. 25–27, 2004.

[79] N. Ye, Q. Chen, and C. M. Borror, “EWMA forecast of normal system
activity for computer intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 53, no. 4,
pp. 557–566, Dec. 2004.

[80] C.-W. Ten, C.-C. Liu, and G. Manimaran, “Vulnerability assessment of
cybersecurity for SCADA systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 1836–1846, Nov. 2008.

[81] G. Dondossola, J. Szanto, M. Masera, and I. N. Fovino, “Evaluation of
the effects of intentional threats to power substation control systems,” in
Proc. CNIP, Rome, Italy, 2006.

[82] C. M. Davis, J. E. Tate, H. Okhravl, C. Grier, T. J. Overbye, and D. Nicol,
“SCADA cybersecurity test bed development,” in Proc. NAPS, Sep. 2006,
pp. 483–488.

[83] G. Dondossola, F. Garrone, J. Szanto, and F. Gennaro, “A laboratory test
bed for the evaluation of cyber-attacks to interacting ICT infrastructures
of power grid operators,” in Proc. CIRED Seminar: SmartGrid Distrib.,
Frankfurt, Germany, Jun. 2008, p. 54.

[84] B. Schneier, “Attack trees: Modeling security threats,” Dobb’s J., vol. 24,

no. 12, pp. 21–29, Dec. 1999.

[85] A. Moore, R. Ellison, and R. Linger, Attack modeling for informa-
tion security and survivability, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA,
CMU/SEI-2001-TN-001. [Online]. Available: http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/
moore01attack.html

[86] G. Conti, M. Ahamad, and J. Stasko, “Attacking information visual-
ization system usability overloading and deceiving the human,” in Proc.
ACM Symp. Usable Privacy Security, Pittsburgh, PA, Jun. 2005, vol. 93,
pp. 89–100.

[87] C. Fung, Y. L. Chen, X. Wang, J. Lee, R. Tarquini, M. Anderson, and
R. Linger, “Survivability analysis of distributed systems using attack
tree methodology,” in Proc. IEEE MILCOM, Oct. 17–20, 2005, vol. 1,
pp. 583–589.

[88] G. C. Dalton, R. F. Mills, J. M. Colombi, and R. A. Raines, “Analyzing
attack trees using generalized stochastic Petri nets,” in Proc. IEEE Inf.
Assurance Workshop, Jun. 2006, pp. 116–123.

Chee-Wooi Ten (S’00) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from Iowa State
University, Ames, in 1999 and 2001, respectively.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
the School of Electrical, Electronic, and Mechanical
Engineering, University College Dublin, National
University of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

He was a Summer Intern with the MidAmerican
Energy Control Center in 2000. He was also an
Application Engineer with Siemens Energy Manage-
ment and Information System, Singapore, from 2002
to 2005. His research interests include interdependence modeling for power
infrastructure.

