EXAMINING  THE  CYBER  THREAT  TO  CRITICAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ECONOMY 

HEARING 

BEFORE THE 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, 

INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, 
AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES 

OF THE 

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY 

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

ONE  HUNDRED  TWELFTH  CONGRESS 

FIRST  SESSION 

MARCH  16,  2011 

Serial No. 112–11 

Printed  for  the  use  of  the  Committee  on  Homeland  Security 

Available  via  the  World  Wide  Web:  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ 

72–221 PDF 

WASHINGTON  : 

2012 

U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office

Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800

Fax: (202) 512–2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402–0001

COMMITTEE  ON  HOMELAND  SECURITY 

PETER T.  KING,  New  York,  Chairman 

LAMAR SMITH,  Texas 
DANIEL E.  LUNGREN,  California 
MIKE ROGERS,  Alabama 
MICHAEL T.  MCCAUL,  Texas 
GUS M.  BILIRAKIS,  Florida 
PAUL C.  BROUN,  Georgia 
CANDICE S.  MILLER,  Michigan 
TIM WALBERG,  Michigan 
CHIP CRAVAACK,  Minnesota 
JOE WALSH,  Illinois 
PATRICK MEEHAN,  Pennsylvania 
BEN QUAYLE,  Arizona 
SCOTT RIGELL,  Virginia 
BILLY LONG,  Missouri 
JEFF DUNCAN,  South  Carolina 
TOM MARINO,  Pennsylvania 
BLAKE FARENTHOLD,  Texas 
MO BROOKS,  Alabama 

BENNIE G.  THOMPSON,  Mississippi 
LORETTA SANCHEZ,  California 
SHEILA JACKSON LEE,  Texas 
HENRY CUELLAR,  Texas 
YVETTE D.  CLARKE,  New  York 
LAURA RICHARDSON,  California 
DANNY K.  DAVIS,  Illinois 
BRIAN HIGGINS,  New  York 
JACKIE SPEIER,  California 
CEDRIC L.  RICHMOND,  Louisiana 
HANSEN CLARKE,  Michigan 
WILLIAM R.  KEATING,  Massachusetts 
VACANCY 
VACANCY 

MICHAEL J.  RUSSELL,  Staff  Director/Chief  Counsel 

KERRY ANN WATKINS,  Senior  Policy  Director 

MICHAEL S.  TWINCHEK,  Chief  Clerk 

I.  LANIER AVANT,  Minority  Staff  Director 

SUBCOMMITTEE  ON  CYBERSECURITY,  INFRASTRUCTURE  PROTECTION, 

AND  SECURITY  TECHNOLOGIES 

DANIEL E.  LUNGREN,  California,  Chairman 

MICHAEL T.  MCCAUL,  Texas 
TIM WALBERG,  Michigan,  Vice  Chair 
PATRICK MEEHAN,  Pennsylvania 
BILLY LONG,  Missouri 
TOM MARINO,  Pennsylvania 
PETER T.  KING,  New  York  (Ex  Officio) 

YVETTE D.  CLARKE,  New  York 
LAURA RICHARDSON,  California 
CEDRIC L.  RICHMOND,  Louisiana 
WILLIAM R.  KEATING,  Massachusetts 
BENNIE G.  THOMPSON,  Mississippi  (Ex  Officio) 

COLEY C.  O’BRIEN,  Staff  Director 

ALAN CARROLL,  Subcommittee  Clerk 

DR.  CHRIS BECK,  Minority  Subcommittee  Director 

(II) 

C O N T E N T S 

STATEMENTS 

The  Honorable  Daniel  E.  Lungren,  a  Representative  in  Congress  From  the 
State  of  California,  and  Chairman,  Subcommittee  on  Cybersecurity,  Infra-
structure Protection, and Security Technologies  ...............................................
The  Honorable  Yvette  D.  Clark,  a  Representative  in  Congress  From  the 
State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, 
Infrastructure Protection, and Security Technologies  .......................................

WITNESS 

Mr.  Philip  Reitinger,  Deputy  Under  Secretary,  National  Protection  and  Pro-

grams Directorate, Department of Homeland Security: 
Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  .............................................................................................
Mr. Gregory Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Issues, Government 

Accountability Office: 
Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  .............................................................................................
Dr.  Phyllis  Schneck,  Vice  President  and  Chief  Technical  Officer,  McAfee 

Inc.: 
Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  .............................................................................................
Mr.  James  A.  Lewis,  Director  and  Senior  Fellow,  Technology  and  Public 

Policy Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies: 
Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  .............................................................................................

Ms. Mischel Kwon, President, Mischel Kwon Associates: 

Oral Statement  .....................................................................................................
Prepared Statement  .............................................................................................

Page 

1 

2 

5 
6 

14 
16 

32 
34 

39 
40 

46 
47 

Question From Chairman Daniel E. Lungren of California  .................................

63 

APPENDIX 

(III) 

EXAMINING 
CRITICAL 
AMERICAN  ECONOMY 

THE 
TO 
INFRASTRUCTURE  AND  THE 

THREAT 

CYBER 

Wednesday,  March  16,  2011 

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY, 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROTECTION, AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES, 

Washington, DC. 

The  subcommittee  met,  pursuant  to  call,  at  10:05  a.m.,  in  Room 
311,  Cannon  House  Office  Building,  Hon.  Daniel  E.  Lungren 
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. 

Present:  Representatives  Lungren,  McCaul,  Walberg,  Meehan, 

Long, Marino, Clarke, Richmond, and Keating. 

Mr.  LUNGREN.  The  Committee  on  Homeland  Security,  Sub-
committee  on  Cybersecurity,  Infrastructure  Protection,  and  Secu-
rity Technologies will come to order. 

The  subcommittee  is  meeting  today  to  hear  testimony  from  Phil 
Reitinger, the Deputy Under Secretary for National Protection and 
Programs  Directorate  of  DHS;  Gregory  Wilshusen,  the  Director  of 
Information  Security  Issues  at  GAO;  Phyllis  Schneck,  Vice  Presi-
dent  and  Chief  Technology  Officer  at  McAfee,  Inc.;  James  Lewis, 
Director  and  Senior  Policy  Fellow  at  the  Center  for  Strategic  and 
International  Studies;  and  Mischel  Kwon,  President  of  Mischel 
Kwon Associates, LLC. 

Today  we  will  examine  the  cyber  threat  to  U.S.  critical  infra-
structure,  how  it  affects  the  economy,  and  what  Government  is 
doing to address the threat. 

Twenty-five years ago, the concept of cyber threat, or a cyber at-
tack,  was  an  issue  of  interest  to  really  only  a  few  researchers  in 
academics.  In  this  post-9/11  terrorist  era  the  cyber  threat  is  seri-
ous,  multifaceted,  and  boundless,  posing  a  significant  risk  to  U.S. 
economic and National security. 

The  Director  of  National  Intelligence  stated  in  testimony  before 
the  Congress,  ‘‘The  growing  connectivity  between  information  sys-
tems,  the  internet,  and  other  infrastructures  creates  opportunities 
for  attackers  to  disrupt  telecommunications,  electrical  power,  en-
ergy  pipelines,  financial  networks,  and  other  critical  infrastruc-
tures.’’ 

The information revolution launched by the internet has reached 
into  every  corner  of  our  lives.  While  it  provides  users  many  bene-
fits,  it  also  exposes  them  to  new  and  dangerous  risks.  These  new 
risks include cyber criminals, spies and terrorists, using the digital 

(1) 

2 

internet as a pathway to personal bank accounts as well as Govern-
ment  and  industrial  secrets.  Cyber  attacks  are  growing  more  fre-
quent, targeted, sophisticated, and dangerous. 

Most  of  these  attacks  are  motivated  by  financial  or  intellectual 
property  theft,  disruption  of  commerce,  or  intelligence  collection. 
Cyber  attacks  have  been  launched  against  nations,  Estonia  in 
2007, Georgia in 2009, and Iran in 2010. They were all the subject 
of  cyber  attacks  that  either  paralyzed  Government  operations  or 
targeted  critical  infrastructure.  Last  year,  Google  and  20  other 
major companies were the targets of highly sophisticated attacks to 
steal  their  intellectual  property  and  user  accounts.  This  attack  al-
legedly emanated from China. 

If  terror  groups  are  watching  this  cyber  activity  and  targeting 
our critical infrastructure—and we believe they are—this raises the 
stakes  in  our  war  on  terror.  U.S.  critical  infrastructure—by  that  I 
mean roads, bridges, dams, electrical system, power systems—over-
all, that critical infrastructure is the backbone of our dynamic and 
productive economy. Attacks on this critical infrastructure will im-
pact  our  National  and  economic  security  as  well  as  the  health  and 
safety of our fellow citizens. 

Today,  our  critical  infrastructure  relies  extensively  on  computer-
ized  information  systems  and  the  internet  which  cannot  be  pro-
tected as in the traditional way with guns, gates, and guards. This 
reliance  on  computers  and  the  internet  makes  our  critical  infra-
structure  operations  vulnerable  to  cyber  attack.  This  vulnerability 
was  demonstrated  a  few  years  ago  in  a  simulated  attack  on  our 
electric power grid, which also was code-named Aurora. 

The computer security company, McAfee, reports that 54 percent 
of  executives  of  critical  infrastructure  companies  surveyed  said 
their  companies  had  been  the  victims  of  denial  of  service  attacks 
and  network  infiltration  from  organized  crime,  terrorists,  or  other 
nation states. 

Recent  media  reports  have  described  a  new  cyber  threat  called 
Stuxnet,  which  can  target  critical  infrastructure,  including  nuclear 
facilities.  According  to  these  published  reports,  Stuxnet  is  a  com-
plex  piece  of  malware  designed  to  interfere  with  the  seamen’s  in-
dustrial  control  systems  operating  the  Iranian  nuclear  facilities. 
This  makes  Stuxnet,  at  least  according  to  published  reports,  it 
makes that malware a very dangerous offensive cyber weapon that 
overtakes critical control system operations. 

So  if  an  anonymous  enemy  or  terrorist  ever  seizes  the  control 
systems  of,  let’s  say,  dams  or  chemical  or  power  plants  via  the 
cyber world, that terrorist could cause death and destruction in the 
real world. 

So  many  questions  remain  about  how  to  defend  our  cyberspace. 
What  solutions,  policies,  or  technology  can  we  develop  to  improve 
our Nation’s cybersecurity? We welcome our public and private wit-
nesses today who will begin us on a journey to answer these ques-
tions. 

It  is  now  my  pleasure  to  recognize  the  Ranking  Member  of  our 

subcommittee, Ms. Clarke, for her opening statement. 

Ms.  CLARKE.  Good  morning,  and  thank  you  to  all  of  our  wit-

nesses for appearing before us today. 

3 

I would like to thank Chairman Lungren for holding this hearing 
on  cybersecurity  and  for  your  intention  to  move  expeditiously  on 
what I know we both recognize as a critical issue. 

While there are a number of new faces up here on the dais, I be-
lieve  this  subcommittee  will  continue  to  place  significant  focus  on 
the issue of cybersecurity just as we did during the 110th Congress. 
I  know  Mr.  Lungren  takes  this  responsibility  as  seriously  as  I  do, 
and  I  look  forward  to  partnering  with  him  again  over  the  next  2 
years  to  ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  the  American  people, 
American  businesses,  American  infrastructure,  and  the  American 
way of life. 

Today’s  hearing  will  likely  be  the  first  of  several  cybersecurity 
hearings  that  the  subcommittee  will  hold,  and  it  is  easy  to  under-
stand why this issue dominates our agenda. We rely on information 
technology in every aspect of our lives, from our electric grid, bank-
ing  systems,  military  and  government  functions,  to  our  e-mail  and 
web  browsers.  Interconnected  computers  and  networks  have  led  to 
amazing  developments  in  our  society.  Increased  productivity, 
knowledge, services, and revenues are all benefits generated by our 
modern  networked  world.  But  in  our  rush  to  network  everything, 
few stopped to consider the security ramifications of this new world 
we  were  creating,  and  so  we  find  ourselves  in  an  extremely  dan-
gerous situation today. 

Too  many  vulnerabilities  exist  on  too  many  critical  networks 
which are exposed to too many skilled attackers who can inflict too 
many  intrusions  into  our  systems.  Unfortunately,  to  this  day,  too 
few  people  are  even  aware  of  these  dangers  and  fewer  still  are 
doing anything about it. This committee will continue to sound the 
alarm, raise awareness of the problems we face, and move forward 
with practical, effective solutions. 

This  hearing  comes  at  a  critical  moment  in  our  Nation’s  ap-
proach  to  the  cyber  threat.  There  is  a  very  real  and  significant 
threat  to  our  National  and  economic  security  that  we  now  face  in 
cyberspace, and we must do something equally real and significant 
to meet this challenge. 

We are expecting, and this committee is eager to see, a National 
cybersecurity  strategy  from  the  White  House  to  be  released  very 
soon.  The  Department  is  finalizing  its  National  cyber  incident  re-
sponse plan and will also include a cybersecurity strategy as called 
for in the 2010 Quadrennial Homeland Security Review. 

The Congress is interested in legislation to afford DHS authority 
it  needs  to  protect  the  dot-gov  domain  and  critical  infrastructures 
in the private sector. The previous two decades have seen countless 
reports from America’s thought leaders in cybersecurity containing 
hundreds of recommendations about how to improve America’s pos-
ture in cyberspace. What has been lacking is the courage and lead-
ership  to  actually  implement  these  recommendations.  To  ensure 
our  National  and  economic  security,  now  is  the  time  we  must  act. 
The  U.S.  Government  must  chart  a  new  course  to  cyberspace. 
The private sector must also be a full partner and accept its share 
of responsibility for our combined security. Now is the time to stop 
planning and start acting. 

The  Chairman’s  intention  with  this  hearing  is  to  give  this  sub-
committee  some  background  on  the  issues  facing  us.  Cybercrime 

4 

costs this country billions of dollars a year. We know that our Gov-
ernment networks are attacked tens of thousands of times per day 
and  private  sector  networks  are  attacked  even  more  often.  We 
know that our critical infrastructures are already compromised and 
penetrated.  The  enemy  has  already  successfully  attacked  and  con-
tinues to do so. We need to absorb this information, get up to speed 
quickly,  and  move  forward  to  address  this  issue.  We  have  already 
lost  many  small  battles.  We  have  to  start  protecting  ourselves  be-
fore  an  attack  big  enough  to  cause  irreparable  damage  is  carried 
out. 

To the witnesses appearing before us today, I thank you for being 
here, and I welcome your thoughts on the issues before us, includ-
ing  what  you  think  an  effective  National  cybersecurity  policy 
should  look  like.  Chairman  Lungren  and  I  intend  for  this  sub-
committee,  as  well  as  the  full  committee,  to  play  a  leading  role  in 
shaping our National cyber posture in the years to come. 

Thank you, Chairman, and I yield back. 
Mr.  LUNGREN.  Thank  you  very  much,  Madam  Ranking  Member, 
and I appreciate your spirit of cooperation with which you led this 
subcommittee and continuing now. 

Other  Members  are  reminded  that  they  may  give  us  their  state-

ments that will be entered into the record. 

We  are  pleased  to  have  a  very  distinguished  panel  of  witnesses 
before  us  today  on  this  important  topic.  Deputy  Under  Secretary 
Phil  Reitinger  was  named  Deputy  Under  Secretary  for  NPPD  in 
2009.  He  also  serves  as  the  Director  of  the  National  Cybersecurity 
Center.  In  this  role,  he  provides  strategic  direction  to  the  Depart-
ment’s  cybersecurity  efforts.  Prior  to  joining  the  Department,  he 
was  the  senior  security  strategist  for  Microsoft’s  trustworthy  com-
puting  program,  so  he  is  well  versed  in  the  challenges  facing  both 
Government  and  the  private  sector  in  dealing  with  the  important 
issue of cybersecurity. 

Prior  to  serving  with  Microsoft,  Deputy  Under  Secretary 
Reitinger  was  the  Executive  Director  for  the  Department  of  De-
fense’s  Cybercrime  Center.  Before  that,  he  was  the  Deputy  Chief 
of  the  Department  of  Justice’s  Computer  Crime  and  Intellectual 
Property Section, proving that he just can’t keep a job. No. He has 
had tremendous experience and has a unique perspective from mul-
tiple  positions  within  the  administration  and  therefore  has  much 
wisdom with which to guide us. 

Greg  Wilshusen  has  been  with  the  GAO  for  over  13  years  and 
has been over 29 years in auditing financial management informa-
tion  systems.  He  is  a  certified  public  accountant,  certified  internal 
auditor,  certified  information  systems  auditor.  He  holds  a  B.S.  de-
gree  in  business  administration  from  the  University  of  Missouri. 
Are they in the—— 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  Yes,  they  are.  In  fact,  they  are  playing  tomor-

row evening at 9:50 against—— 

Mr.  LUNGREN.  I  see.  Notre  Dame  doesn’t  play  until  Friday  at 
1:40 eastern time, but I hope to be in California so I will be watch-
ing them from the Pacific coast. 

An  MS  in  information  management  from  George  Washington 
University School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. At GAO, he 

5 

has overseen multiple reports on information security, both at DHS 
and Government-wide. 

The Chair recognizes Mr. Reitinger, who will testify on behalf of 

the Department of Homeland Security. 
STATEMENT  OF  PHILIP  REITINGER,  DEPUTY  UNDER  SEC-
RETARY,  NATIONAL  PROTECTION  AND  PROGRAMS  DIREC-
TORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
Mr.  REITINGER.  Thank  you  very  much,  Chairman  Lungren  and 
Ranking Member Clarke. It is indeed an honor to be here today to 
talk before the committee. 

As  you  pointed  out,  sir,  my  name  is  Phillip  Reitinger,  and  I  am 
the Deputy Under Secretary at the Department of Homeland Secu-
rity. 

Appropos  of  your  comment  about  my  inability  to  keep  a  job,  I 
would say I am not sure I need to be here today based on the open-
ing  comments  that  you  and  the  Ranking  Member  made.  Let  me 
give you an Amen from the congregation; you understand the issue, 
you  get  it.  So  I  am  going  to  speak  very  briefly  about  three  quick 
points, and then I would be happy, after Greg talks, to answer any 
questions that you have. 

The three points I wanted to quickly raise are that cybersecurity 
is a critical issue; second, there is no simple solution, neither entity 
or  technology,  that  is  going  to  solve  the  problem;  and  three,  that 
although  we  have  made  significant  progress  over  the  course  of  my 
15  to  20  years  involved  in  this  space  and  the  more  significant  ef-
forts of many more people over a longer period of time, we are not 
yet where we need to be. We need to actually—not to be jargonistic, 
but we need to take this to a new level. 

So  let  me  start  with  the  first  point,  that  cybersecurity  is  a  crit-
ical  issue.  This  goes  back  to  the  comments  that  you  made,  Chair-
man.  The  threat  is  significant,  and  the  threat  is  getting  more  sig-
nificant. Perhaps more important, we are depending more on infor-
mation networks every day—not just for looking at a cute video on- 
line  or  our  ability  to  send  an  e-mail,  but  for  the  basic  functioning 
of our economy. 

It  is  not  just  a  security  issue,  it  is  an  economic  issue.  We  don’t 
have power, we don’t have phone service, we don’t have 9–1–1 serv-
ice,  we  don’t  get  water,  we  don’t  have  banking  without  the  proper 
functioning  of  the  internet  and  the  systems  that  are  connected  to 
it.  So  we  must  treat  this  as  a  critical  issue,  and,  in  fact,  we  have, 
over  the  course  of  the  last  two  administrations.  Cybersecurity  has 
been  a  bipartisan  issue,  going  from  the  launch  of  the  Comprehen-
sive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative  in  the  prior  administration 
through the current Presidents’s Cyberspace Policy Review and the 
on-going work to cross both administrations and across both parties 
in both Houses of Congress to move the issue forward. 

But  it  is  a  complex  problem.  There  is  no  simple  solution.  There 
is no single entity, no private sector player or even the private sec-
tor together. DHS, DOD, the Department of Commerce, all of them 
need  to  be  involved,  and  none  of  them  standing  alone—and  none 
of them even standing in the forefront with a little bit of help from 
others  is  going  to  solve  the  problem.  We  actually  do  have  to  work 
this  broadly  in  partnership.  By  partnership,  I  don’t  mean  saying 

6 

partnership we all sing Kumbaya and we go home. I mean, we ac-
tually  work  together  to  drive  outcomes,  that  we  have  known  roles 
and responsibilities and we execute on those things. 

In  that  space,  DHS  plays  a  critical  role.  We  are  responsible  for 
leading  the  protection  of  the  civilian  government  systems  and  pri-
vate  sector,  so-called  dot-com  systems,  even  though  it  is  broader 
than that. I say ‘‘lead’’ advisedly because this is not about DHS will 
come  in  and  solve  all  your  problems  for  you.  We  are  not  going  to 
do  that.  But  what  we  can  do  is  we  can  help.  Everybody  has  got  to 
build security into their own operations—private sector companies, 
civilian government agencies and DHS; we have got to build it into 
our  DNA.  DHS  has  got  to  do  the  job  of  helping  people  to  execute 
much  more  effectively.  We  have  had  signal  successes  in  that  role. 
The Chairman mentioned the creation of the first real National in-
cident response plan to bring all of Government and private sector 
together  so  we  can  respond  as  one  Nation  to  a  significant  cyber 
event. 

A plan that we tested in a major exercise last year that involved 
several thousand people—literally, several thousand people around 
the globe, tens of private sector companies, over 10 nations around 
the  world  and  over  10  States  and  localities.  I  will  talk  more  after 
my opening statement in response to your questions. 

The last thing I would say in closing is that much more remains 
to be done. As the Ranking Member indicated, we are systemically 
vulnerable.  We  have  made  significant  progress,  but  we  are  not  yet 
where  we  need  to  be.  So  as  the  Ranking  Member  indicated,  what 
we have to do is focus on implementation. What makes a difference 
day  to  day,  week  to  week,  month  to  month?  How  can  we  do  that? 
That  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  partnership  from  the  Government 
Accountability Office is so important to us. It can help us prioritize, 
indicate  areas  for  further  progress,  and  help  us  find  the  best  way 
forward. 

Together, we need to have that broad public dialogue which I am 
sure will take place this year across the public and private sectors 
about how we close the gap between where we are now and where 
we  need  to  be.  With  that,  I  will  look  forward  very  much  to  the 
questions of the subcommittee. Thank you. 
[The statement of Mr. Reitinger follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF PHILIP REITINGER 

MARCH 16, 2011 
INTRODUCTION 

Chairman Lungren, Vice Chairman Walberg, Ranking Member Clarke, and distin-
guished  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  appear  before  you  today 
to  discuss  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security’s  (DHS)  cybersecurity  mission.  I 
will provide an overview of the current cybersecurity environment, the Department’s 
cybersecurity mission as it relates to critical infrastructure, and the coordination of 
this mission with our public and private sector partners. 

We  would  like  to  work  more  with  you  to  convey  the  relevance  of  cybersecurity  to 
average Americans. Increasingly, the services we rely on for daily life, such as water 
distribution  and  treatment,  electricity  generation  and  transmission,  health  care, 
transportation,  and  financial  transactions  depend  on  an  underlying  information 
technology  and  communications  infrastructure.  Cyber  threats  put  the  availability 
and security of these and other services at risk. 

7 

THE CURRENT CYBERSECURITY ENVIRONMENT 

The United States confronts a combination of known and unknown vulnerabilities, 
strong  and  rapidly  expanding  adversary  capabilities,  and  a  lack  of  comprehensive 
threat  and  vulnerability  awareness.  Within  this  dynamic  environment,  we  are  con-
fronted  with  threats  that  are  more  targeted,  more  sophisticated,  and  more  serious. 
Sensitive information is routinely stolen from both Government and private sector 
networks,  undermining  confidence  in  our  information  systems  and  the  information 
collection  and  sharing  process,  and  as  bad  as  the  loss  of  precious  National  intellec-
tual capital is, we increasingly face threats that are even greater. We currently can-
not  be  certain  that  our  information  infrastructure  will  remain  accessible  and  reli-
able during a time of crisis. 

We  face  persistent,  unauthorized,  and  often  unattributed  intrusions  into  Federal 
Executive  Branch  civilian  networks.  These  intruders  span  a  spectrum  of  malicious 
actors, including nation states, terrorist networks, organized criminal groups, or in-
dividuals  located  here  in  the  United  States.  They  have  varying  levels  of  access  and 
technical  sophistication,  but  all  have  nefarious  intent.  Several  are  capable  of  tar-
geting  elements  of  the  U.S.  information  infrastructure  to  disrupt,  dismantle,  or  de-
stroy  systems  upon  which  we  depend.  Motives  include  intelligence  collection,  intel-
lectual  property  or  monetary  theft,  or  disruption  of  commercial  activities,  among 
others.  Criminal  elements  continue  to  show  increasing  levels  of  sophistication  in 
their technical and targeting capabilities and have shown a willingness to sell these 
capabilities on the underground market. In addition, terrorist groups and their sym-
pathizers  have  expressed  interest  in  using  cyberspace  to  target  and  harm  the 
United  States  and  its  citizens.  While  some  have  commented  on  terrorists’  own  lack 
of technical abilities, the availability of technical tools for purchase and use remains 
a potential threat. 

Malicious  cyber  activity  can  instantaneously  result  in  virtual  or  physical  con-
sequences that threaten National and economic security, critical infrastructure, pub-
lic  health  and  welfare,  and  confidence  in  Government.  Similarly,  stealthy  intruders 
can  lay  a  hidden  foundation  for  future  exploitation  or  attack,  which  they  can  then 
execute  at  their  leisure—and  at  their  time  of  greatest  advantage.  Securing  cyber-
space  requires  a  layered  security  approach.  Moreover,  securing  cyberspace  is  also 
critical to accomplishing nearly all of DHS’s other missions successfully. 

We need to support the efforts of our State and local government and private sec-
tor partners to secure themselves against malicious activity in cyberspace. Similarly, 
we  need  to  ensure  that  the  Federal  civilian  environment  is  secure  and  that  legiti-
mate traffic is allowed to flow freely while malicious traffic is prevented from pene-
trating  our  defenses.  Collaboratively,  public  and  private  sector  partners  must  use 
our  knowledge  of  these  systems  and  their  interdependencies  to  prepare  to  respond 
should  defensive  efforts  fail.  This  is  a  serious  challenge,  and  DHS  is  continually 
making  strides  to  improve  the  Nation’s  overall  operational  posture  and  policy  ef-
forts.  In  addition,  other  departments,  such  as  the  Department  of  Education,  are 
working  to  educate  parents  and  students  on  internet  safety  and  privacy  protection. 

CYBERSECURITY MISSION 

Let  me  be  clear  that  no  single  technology—or  single  Government  entity—alone 
can  overcome  the  cybersecurity  challenges  our  Nation  faces.  Cybersecurity  must 
start with informed users taking necessary precautions and extend through a coordi-
nated effort between the private sector, critical infrastructure owners and operators, 
and  the  extensive  expertise  that  lies  across  coordinated  Government  entities.  The 
National  Protection  and  Programs  Directorate  (NPPD)  within  DHS  is  responsible 
for the following key cybersecurity missions: 
• Leading the effort to secure Federal Executive Branch civilian departments and 
• Providing  technical  expertise  to  the  private  sector  and  critical  infrastructure 
and key resources (CIKR) owners and operators—whether private sector, State, 
or municipality owned—to bolster their cybersecurity preparedness, risk assess-
ment, mitigation and incident response capabilities; 

agencies’ unclassified networks; 

• Raising cybersecurity awareness among the general public; and 
• Coordinating the National response to domestic cyber emergencies. 
• Leveraging  cyber  defense  capability  across  all  departments  and  agencies  to  de-
tect, respond, isolate, and remediate cyber attacks or practices dangerous to se-
curity and privacy. 

In  a  reflection  of  the  bipartisan  nature  with  which  the  Federal  Government  con-
tinues to approach cybersecurity, President Obama determined that the Comprehen-
sive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative  (CNCI)  and  its  associated  activities  should 
evolve  to  become  key  elements  of  the  broader  National  cybersecurity  efforts.  These 

8 

CNCI initiatives play a central role in achieving many of the key recommendations 
of the President’s Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Infor-
mation  and  Communications  Infrastructure.  Following  the  publication  of  those  rec-
ommendations in May 2009, DHS and its components developed a long-range vision 
of cybersecurity for the Department and the Nation’s homeland security enterprise, 
which  is  encapsulated  in  the  Quadrennial  Homeland  Security  Review  (QHSR).  The 
QHSR  provides  an  overarching  framework  for  the  Department  and  defines  our  key 
priorities  and  goals.  One  of  the  five  priority  areas  detailed  in  the  QHSR  is  safe-
guarding and securing cyberspace. Within the cybersecurity mission area, the QHSR 
identifies  two  overarching  goals:  To  help  create  a  safe,  secure,  and  resilient  cyber 
environment; and to promote cybersecurity knowledge and innovation. 

In alignment with the QHSR, Secretary Napolitano consolidated many of the De-
partment’s cybersecurity efforts under NPPD. The Office of Cybersecurity and Com-
munications (CS&C), a component of NPPD, focuses on reducing risk to the Nation’s 
communications and information technology infrastructures and the sectors that de-
pend  upon  them,  as  well  as  enabling  timely  response  and  recovery  of  these  infra-
structures  under  all  circumstances.  The  functions  and  mission  of  the  National  Cy-
bersecurity Center (NCSC) are now supported by CS&C. These functions include co-
ordinating  operations  among  the  six  largest  Federal  cyber  centers.  CS&C  also  co-
ordinates  National  security  and  emergency  preparedness  communications  planning 
and  provisioning  for  the  Federal  Government  and  other  stakeholders.  CS&C  com-
prises  three  divisions:  the  National  Cyber  Security  Division  (NCSD),  the  Office  of 
Emergency  Communications,  and  the  National  Communications  System.  Within 
NCSD,  the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  is 
working more closely than ever with our public and private sector partners to share 
what we learn from EINSTEIN 2, a Federal executive agency computer network in-
trusion  detection  system,  to  deepen  our  collective  understanding,  identify  threats 
collaboratively,  and  develop  effective  security  responses.  EINSTEIN  enables  us  to 
respond  proactively  to  warnings  and  other  indicators  of  operational  cyber  attacks, 
and  we  have  many  examples  showing  that  this  program  investment  has  paid  for 
itself several times over. 

Teamwork—ranging from intra-agency to international collaboration—is essential 
to  securing  cyberspace.  Simply  put,  the  cybersecurity  mission  cannot  be  accom-
plished by any one agency; it requires teamwork and coordination. Together, we can 
leverage  resources,  personnel,  and  skill  sets  that  are  needed  to  achieve  a  more  se-
cure and reliable cyberspace. 

NCSD  collaborates  with  Federal  Government  stakeholders,  including  civilian 
agencies, law enforcement, the military, the intelligence community, State and local 
partners, and private sector stakeholders, to conduct risk assessments and mitigate 
vulnerabilities  and  threats  to  information  technology  assets  and  activities  affecting 
the  operation  of  civilian  government  and  private  sector  critical  infrastructures. 
NCSD also provides cyber threat and vulnerability analysis, early warning, and inci-
dent  response  assistance  for  public  and  private  sector  constituents.  To  that  end, 
NCSD  carries  out  the  majority  of  DHS’  non-law  enforcement  cybersecurity  respon-
sibilities. 

NATIONAL CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE 

The  President’s  Cyberspace  Policy  Review  called  for  ‘‘a  comprehensive  framework 
to  facilitate  coordinated  responses  by  government,  the  private  sector,  and  allies  to 
a significant cyber incident.’’ DHS coordinated the interagency, State and local gov-
ernment, and private sector working group that developed the National Cyber Inci-
dent  Response  Plan.  The  plan  provides  a  framework  for  effective  incident  response 
capabilities and coordination among Federal agencies, State and local governments, 
the  private  sector,  and  international  partners  during  significant  cyber  incidents.  It 
is designed to be flexible and adaptable to allow synchronization of response activi-
ties  across  jurisdictional  lines.  In  September  2010,  DHS  hosted  Cyber  Storm  III,  a 
response  exercise  in  which  members  of  the  domestic  and  international  cyber  inci-
dent response community addressed the scenario of a coordinated cyber event. Dur-
ing the event, the National Cyber Incident Response Plan was activated and its inci-
dent  response  framework  was  tested.  Based  on  observations  from  the  exercise,  the 
plan is in its final stages of revision prior to publication. 

Cyber Storm III also tested the National Cybersecurity and Communications Inte-
gration  Center  (NCCIC)—DHS’  24-hour  cyber  watch  and  warning  center—and  the 
Federal  Government’s  full  suite  of  cybersecurity  response  capabilities.  The  NCCIC 
works  closely  with  Government  at  all  levels  and  with  the  private  sector  to  coordi-
nate the integrated and unified response to cyber and communications incidents im-
pacting homeland security. 

9 

Numerous DHS components, including US–CERT, the Industrial Control Systems 
Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS–CERT), and the National Coordinating Cen-
ter  for  Telecommunications  (NCC),  are  collocated  into  the  NCCIC.  Also  present  in 
the  NCCIC  are  other  Federal  partners,  such  as  the  Department  of  Defense  (DoD) 
and members of the law enforcement and intelligence communities. The NCCIC also 
physically  collocates  Federal  staff  with  private  sector  and  non-Governmental  part-
ners.  Currently,  representatives  from  the  Information  Technology  and  Communica-
tions  sectors  are  located  at  the  NCCIC.  We  are  also  finalizing  steps  to  add  rep-
resentatives from the Banking and Finance sector, as well as the Multi-State Infor-
mation Sharing and Analysis Center (MS–ISAC). 

By leveraging the integrated operational capabilities of its member organizations, 
the NCCIC serves as an ‘‘always on’’ cyber incident response and management cen-
ter,  providing  indications  and  warning  of  imminent  incidents,  and  maintaining  a 
National  cyber  ‘‘common  operating  picture.’’  This  facilitates  situational  awareness 
among  all  partner  organizations,  and  also  creates  a  repository  of  all  vulnerability, 
intrusion,  incident,  and  mitigation  activities.  The  NCCIC  also  serves  as  a  National 
point  of  integration  for  cyber  expertise  and  collaboration,  particularly  when  devel-
oping guidance to mitigate risks and resolve incidents. Finally, the unique and inte-
grated  nature  of  the  NCCIC  allows  for  a  scalable  and  flexible  coordination  with  all 
interagency  and  private  sector  staff  during  steady-state  operations,  in  order  to 
strengthen  relationships  and  solidify  procedures  as  well  as  effectively  incorporate 
partners as needed during incidents. 

PROVIDING TECHNICAL EXPERTISE TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND CRITICAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

DHS has significant cybersecurity capabilities, and we are using those capabilities 
to great effect as we work collaboratively with the private sector to protect the Na-
tion’s  CIKR.  We  engage  with  the  private  sector  on  a  voluntary  basis  to  provide  on- 
site analysis, mitigation support, and assessment assistance. Over the past year, we 
have  repeatedly  shown  our  ability  to  materially  and  expeditiously  assist  companies 
with cyber intrusion mitigation and incident response. We are able to do so through 
our trusted and close relationships with private sector companies as well as Federal 
departments and agencies. Finally, our success in assisting the private sector is due 
in  no  small  part  to  our  dedication  to  properly  and  fully  addressing  privacy,  civil 
rights, and civil liberties in all that we do. Initiating technical assistance with a pri-
vate company to provide them analysis and mitigation advice is a sensitive endeav-
or—one that requires trust and strict confidentiality. Within our analysis and warn-
ing  mission  space,  DHS  has  a  proven  ability  to  provide  that  level  of  trust  and  con-
fidence in the engagement. Our efforts are unique among Federal agencies’ capabili-
ties  in  that  DHS  focuses  on  computer  network  defense  and  protection  rather  than 
law  enforcement  or  intelligence  functions.  DHS  engages  precisely  to  mitigate  the 
threat to the network to reduce future risks. 

Our  approach  requires  vigilance  and  a  voluntary  public-private  partnership.  In-
deed, we are continuing to build our capabilities and our relationships; we must be-
cause the cyber threat trends only more sophisticated and more frequent. 

Over  the  past  year,  we  stood  up  the  NCCIC  and  are  adding  staff  to  that  center, 
both from existing DHS personnel and from partner organizations in the public and 
private  sectors.  More  broadly,  we  are  continuing  to  hire  more  cybersecurity  profes-
sionals  and  are  increasing  training  available  to  our  employees.  We  have  an  oper-
ational National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP), and we continue to update 
and  improve  it  with  input  from  senior  cybersecurity  leaders.  We  will  be  releasing 
the NCIRP publicly in the coming weeks. We are executing within our current mis-
sion and authorities now: Receiving and responding to substantial netflow data from 
our  intrusion  detection  technologies  deployed  to  our  Federal  partners,  and 
leveraging  that  data  to  provide  early  warnings  and  indicators  across  Government 
and industry. With our people, processes, and technology, we stand ready to execute 
the responsibilities of the future. 

US–CERT provides remote and on-site response support and defense against ma-
licious cyber activity for the Federal Executive Branch civilian networks. US–CERT 
also collaborates, provides remote and on-site response support and shares informa-
tion  with  State  and  local  government,  critical  infrastructure  owners  and  operators, 
and  international  partners  to  address  cyber  threats  and  develop  effective  security 
responses. 

In addition to specific mitigation work we conduct with individual companies and 
sectors, DHS looks at the interdependencies across critical infrastructure sectors for 
a  holistic  approach  to  providing  our  cyber  expertise.  For  example,  the  electric,  nu-
clear,  water,  transportation,  and  communications  sectors  support  functions  across 

10 

all levels of government including Federal, State, local, and Tribal governments, and 
the  private  sector.  Government  bodies  and  organizations  do  not  inherently  produce 
these  services  and  must  rely  on  private  sector  organizations,  just  as  other  busi-
nesses  and  private  citizens  do.  Therefore,  an  event  impacting  control  systems  has 
potential implications at all these levels, and could also have cascading effects upon 
all  18  sectors.  For  example,  water  and  wastewater  treatment,  chemical,  and  trans-
portation depend on the energy sector, and failure in one of these sectors could sub-
sequently affect Government and private sector operations. 

NCCIC’s  operations  are  complemented  in  the  arena  of  industrial  control  systems 
by ICS–CERT. The term ‘‘control system’’ encompasses several types of systems, in-
cluding  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition  (SCADA),  process  control,  and 
other  automated  systems  that  are  found  in  the  industrial  sectors  and  critical  infra-
structure.  These  systems  are  used  to  operate  physical  processes  that  produce  the 
goods  and  services  that  we  rely  upon,  such  as  energy,  drinking  water,  emergency 
services, transportation, postal and shipping, and public health. Control systems se-
curity  is  particularly  important  because  of  the  inherent  interconnectedness  of  the 
CIKR sectors and their dependence on one another. 

As  such,  assessing  risk  and  effectively  securing  industrial  control  systems  are 
vital  to  maintaining  our  Nation’s  strategic  interests,  public  safety,  and  economic 
well-being.  A  successful  cyber  attack  on  a  control  system  could  result  in  physical 
damage,  loss  of  life,  and  cascading  effects  that  could  disrupt  services.  DHS  recog-
nizes that the protection and security of control systems is essential to the Nation’s 
overarching  security  and  economy.  In  this  context,  as  an  example  of  many  related 
initiatives and activities, DHS—in coordination with the Department of Commerce’s 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Department of Energy, 
and  DoD—has  provided  a  forum  for  researchers,  subject  matter  experts  and  practi-
tioners  dealing  with  cyber-physical  systems  security  to  assess  the  current  state  of 
the  art,  identify  challenges,  and  provide  input  to  developing  strategies  for  address-
ing  these  challenges.  Specific  infrastructure  sectors  considered  include  energy, 
chemical,  transportation,  water  and  wastewater  treatment,  health  care  and  public 
health,  and  commercial  facilities.  A  2010  published  report  of  findings  and  rec-
ommendations is available upon request. 

ICS–CERT provides on-site support to owners and operators of critical infrastruc-
ture  for  protection  against  and  response  to  cyber  threats,  including  incident  re-
sponse,  forensic  analysis,  and  site  assessments.  ICS–CERT  also  provides  tools  and 
training  to  increase  stakeholder  awareness  of  evolving  threats  to  industrial  control 
systems. 

A real-world threat emerged last year that significantly changed the landscape of 
targeted  cyber  attacks  on  industrial  control  systems.  Malicious  code,  dubbed 
Stuxnet,  was  detected  in  July  2010.  DHS  analysis  concluded  that  this  highly  com-
plex computer worm was the first of its kind, written to specifically target mission- 
critical control systems running a specific combination of software and hardware. 

ICS–CERT  analyzed  the  code  and  coordinated  actions  with  critical  infrastructure 
asset  owners  and  operators,  Federal  partners,  and  Information  Sharing  and  Anal-
ysis Centers. Our analysis quickly uncovered that sophisticated malware of this type 
potentially  has  the  ability  to  gain  access  to,  steal  detailed  proprietary  information 
from, and manipulate the systems that operate mission-critical processes within the 
Nation’s infrastructure. In other words, this code can automatically enter a system, 
steal  the  formula  for  the  product  being  manufactured,  alter  the  ingredients  being 
mixed in the product, and indicate to the operator and the operator’s anti-virus soft-
ware that everything is functioning normally. 

To  combat  this  threat,  ICS–CERT  has  been  actively  analyzing  and  reporting  on 
Stuxnet since it was first detected in July 2010. To date, ICS–CERT has briefed doz-
ens of Government and industry organizations and released multiple advisories and 
updates  to  the  industrial  control  systems  community  describing  steps  for  detecting 
an  infection  and  mitigating  the  threat.  As  always,  we  attempt  to  balance  the  need 
for  public  information  sharing  while  limiting  the  information  that  malicious  actors 
may  exploit.  DHS  provided  the  alerts  in  accordance  with  its  responsible  disclosure 
processes. 

The  purpose  and  function  for  responsible  disclosure  is  to  ensure  that  DHS  exe-
cutes  its  mission  of  mitigating  risk  to  critical  infrastructure,  not  necessarily  to  be 
the  first  to  publish  on  a  given  threat.  For  example,  ICS–CERT’s  purpose  in  con-
ducting  the  Stuxnet  analysis  was  to  ensure  that  DHS  understood  the  extent  of  the 
risks  so  that  they  could  be  mitigated.  After  conducting  in-depth  malware  analysis 
and developing mitigation steps, we were able to release actionable information that 
benefited our private sector partners. 

Looking ahead, the Department is concerned that attackers could use the increas-
ingly  public  information  about  the  code  to  develop  variants  targeted  at  broader  in-

11 

stallations  of  programmable  equipment  in  control  systems.  Copies  of  the  Stuxnet 
code, in various different iterations, have been publicly available for some time now. 
ICS–CERT and the NCCIC remain vigilant and continue analysis and mitigation ef-
forts of any derivative malware. 

ICS–CERT  will  continue  to  work  with  the  industrial  control  systems  community 
to  investigate  these  and  other  threats  through  malicious  code  and  digital  media 
analysis,  on-site  incident  response  activities,  and  information  sharing  and  partner-
ships. 

PROTECTING FEDERAL CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT NETWORKS 

In addition to its support of private sector owners and operators of infrastructure, 
DHS also collaborates with its partners to increase the security of Federal Executive 
Branch civilian agency networks. The fundamental ways that DHS works to secure 
Federal  networks  are  by  improving  the  ability  of  departments  and  agencies  to  de-
fend  their  systems  and  by  directly  providing  expertise  and  specific  technology  that 
detects, mitigates, and prevents malicious activity on these networks. 

As  part  of  the  CNCI,  DHS  works  with  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget 
(OMB)  to  reduce  and  consolidate  the  number  of  external  connections  that  Federal 
agencies have to the internet through the Trusted Internet Connection (TIC) initia-
tive.  This  initiative  reduces  the  number  of  entry  points  for  potential  vulnerabilities 
into  Government  networks  and  allows  DHS  to  focus  monitoring  efforts  on  limited 
and  known  avenues  through  which  internet  traffic  must  travel.  DHS  conducts  on- 
site evaluations of agencies’ progress toward implementing TIC goals. 

In  conjunction  with  the  TIC  initiative,  the  EINSTEIN  system  is  designed  to  pro-
vide  the  U.S.  Government  with  an  early  warning  system  for  intrusions  to  Federal 
Executive Branch civilian networks, near real-time identification of malicious activ-
ity,  and  automated  disruption  of  that  malicious  activity.  The  second  phase  of  EIN-
STEIN,  known  as  EINSTEIN  2  and  developed  in  2008  as  part  of  the  CNCI,  incor-
porates intrusion detection capabilities into the original EINSTEIN system. DHS is 
currently  deploying  EINSTEIN  2  to  Federal  Executive  Branch  civilian  agency  TIC 
locations  and  Networx  Managed  Trusted  Internet  Protocol  Services  (MTIPS)  pro-
viders,  which  are  private  internet  service  providers  that  serve  Federal  agencies,  to 
assist them with protecting their computers, networks, and information. EINSTEIN 
2 has now been deployed at 15 of the 19 large departments and agencies who main-
tain their own TIC locations. Also, the four MTIPS providers currently provide serv-
ice  to  seven  additional  Federal  agencies.  In  2010,  EINSTEIN  2  sensors  registered 
5.4 million ‘‘hits,’’ an average of more than 450,000 hits per month or nearly 15,000 
hits per day. A hit is an alert triggered by a predetermined intrusion detection sig-
nature that corresponds to a known threat. Each hit represents potential malicious 
activity for further assessment by US–CERT. 

DHS is currently developing the third phase of the EINSTEIN system—an intru-
sion prevention capability which will provide DHS with the ability to automatically 
detect  and  disrupt  malicious  activity  before  harm  is  done  to  critical  networks  and 
systems.  In  advance  of  this  development,  DHS,  in  coordination  with  the  National 
Security  Agency  (NSA),  conducted  the  CNCI  Initiative  3  Exercise,  which  advanced 
the potential capabilities of the EINSTEIN system by demonstrating defensive tech-
nology, sharing near real-time threat information with DoD for enhanced situational 
awareness, and providing a platform upon which an oversight and compliance proc-
ess can be implemented for the evolving set of EINSTEIN capabilities. The Depart-
ment’s Privacy Office and its Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties carefully re-
viewed  the  exercise  concept  of  operations,  and  the  Privacy  Office  worked  with  US– 
CERT to publicly release a detailed Privacy Impact Assessment evaluating the exer-
cise.  US–CERT  also  briefed  the  exercise  to  the  cyber  subcommittee  of  the  inde-
pendent DHS Data Privacy and Integrity Committee. 

Beyond  the  TIC  initiative  and  the  EINSTEIN  system,  DHS,  OMB,  and  the  Na-
tional  Institute  for  Standards  and  Technology  work  cooperatively  with  agencies 
across  the  Federal  Government  to  coordinate  the  protection  of  the  Nation’s  Federal 
information  systems  through  compliance  with  the  Federal  Information  Security 
Management Act of 2002 (FISMA). US–CERT monitors EINSTEIN 2 sensors for in-
trusion  activity  and  receives  self-reported  incident  information  from  Federal  agen-
cies.  This  information  is  reported  to  OMB  for  use  in  its  FISMA  oversight  capacity. 
In  2010,  DHS  also  began  to  administer  oversight  of  the  CyberScope  system,  which 
was  developed  by  the  Department  of  Justice.  This  system  collects  agency  informa-
tion  regarding  FISMA  compliance  and,  as  DHS,  OMB,  and  their  agency  partners 
move  toward  automated  reporting,  the  system  will  enable  real-time  assessments  of 
baseline  security  postures  across  individual  agencies  and  the  Federal  enterprise  as 
a  whole.  This  activity  complements  the  development  of  reference  architectures  that 

12 

DHS  designs  for  Federal  agency  stakeholders  that  are  interested  in  implementing 
security  solutions  based  on  standards  and  best  practices.  DHS  also  works  with  the 
General  Services  Administration  to  create  Blanket  Purchase  Agreements  that  ad-
dress various security solutions for Federal agencies. 

THE DHS CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE 

As  DHS  continues  to  make  progress  on  initiatives  such  as  TIC  and  EINSTEIN, 
the  Department  is  also  mindful  that  the  Nation’s  cybersecurity  challenge  will  not 
be  solved  by  a  single  technology  solution.  Multiple  innovative  technical  tools  are 
necessary and indeed, technology alone is insufficient. The mission requires a larger 
cybersecurity  professional  workforce,  governance  structures  for  enhanced  partner-
ships, more robust information sharing and identity protection, and increased cyber-
security  awareness  among  the  general  public.  Responsibility  for  these  solutions  is, 
and will remain, distributed across public and private sector partners. 

DHS  is  focused  on  building  a  world-class  cybersecurity  team  by  hiring  a  diverse 
group of cybersecurity professionals—computer engineers, scientists, and analysts— 
to secure the Nation’s digital assets and protect against cyber threats to our critical 
infrastructure  and  key  resources.  NCSD  continues  to  hire  cybersecurity  and  infor-
mation technology professionals, nearly tripling its cybersecurity workforce in fiscal 
year  2009  and  nearly  doubling  that  number  again  in  fiscal  year  2010.  NCSD  cur-
rently  has  more  than  230  cybersecurity  professionals  on  board,  with  dozens  more 
in the hiring pipeline. 

Several  initiatives  are  designed  to  increase  the  Nation’s  number  of  highly  quali-
fied  cybersecurity  professionals.  DHS  and  NSA  co-sponsor  the  Centers  of  Academic 
Excellence in Information Assurance Education and Research programs, the goal of 
which  is  to  produce  a  growing  number  of  professionals  with  information  assurance 
expertise  in  various  disciplines.  DHS  and  the  Department  of  State  co-hosted  Oper-
ation  Cyber  Threat  (OCT1.0),  the  first  in  a  series  of  Government-wide  experiential 
and interactive cybersecurity training pilots designed to apply learning concepts and 
share best practices in a secure, simulated environment to build capacity within the 
Federal workforce. In December 2010, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-
gineers  Computer  Society,  the  world’s  leading  organization  of  computing  profes-
sionals,  formally  recognized  the  Master  of  Software  Assurance  (MSwA)  Reference 
Curriculum,  which  DHS  sponsored  through  its  Software  Assurance  (SwA)  Cur-
riculum  Project.  The  MSwA  program  is  the  first  curriculum  of  its  kind  to  focus  on 
assuring  the  functionality,  dependability,  and  security  of  software  and  systems.  Fi-
nally,  DHS  co-sponsored  the  annual  Colloquium  for  Information  Systems  Security 
Education  and  the  Scholarship  for  Services  (SFS)  Job  Fair/Symposium,  which 
brought together 55 Federal agencies and more than 200 SFS students. 

The  National  Initiative  for  Cybersecurity  Education  (NICE)  has  the  dual  goals  of 
a  cyber-savvy  citizenry  and  a  cyber-capable  workforce.  Working  with  NIST,  which 
is  the  overall  interagency  lead,  DHS  heads  the  NICE  awareness  elements  and  co- 
leads  the  training  and  professional  development  components  with  DoD  and  the  Of-
fice of the Director of National Intelligence. 

INTERAGENCY AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE COORDINATION 

Overcoming  new  cybersecurity  challenges  requires  a  coordinated  and  focused  ap-
proach  to  better  secure  the  Nation’s  information  and  communications  infrastruc-
tures. President Obama’s Cyberspace Policy Review reaffirms cybersecurity’s signifi-
cance to the Nation’s economy and security. Establishment of a White House Cyber-
security Coordinator position solidified the priority the administration places on im-
proving cybersecurity. 

No single agency controls cyberspace and the success of our cybersecurity mission 
relies on effective communication and critical partnerships. Many Government play-
ers  have  complementary  roles—including  DHS,  the  intelligence  community,  DoD, 
the  Department  of  Justice,  the  Department  of  State,  and  other  Federal  agencies— 
and they require coordination and leadership to ensure effective and efficient execu-
tion  of  our  collective  cyber  missions.  The  creation  of  a  senior-level  cyber  position 
within  the  White  House  ensures  coordination  and  collaboration  across  Government 
agencies. 

DHS  works  closely  with  its  Federal,  State,  and  local  partners  to  protect  Govern-
ment  cyber  networks.  In  September  2010,  DHS  and  DoD  signed  a  memorandum  of 
agreement that aligns and enhances America’s capabilities to protect against threats 
to  our  critical  civilian  and  military  computer  systems  and  networks,  including  de-
ploying a National Security Agency support team to the NCCIC to enhance the Na-
tional Cyber Incident Response Plan and sending a full-time senior DHS leader and 
support team to the National Security Agency. 

13 

In  November  2010,  the  MS–ISAC  opened  its  Cyber  Security  Operations  Center, 
a  24-hour  watch  and  warning  facility,  which  will  both  enhance  situational  aware-
ness at the State and local level for the NCCIC and allow the Federal Government 
to  quickly  and  efficiently  provide  critical  cyber  risk,  vulnerability,  and  mitigation 
data  to  State  and  local  governments.  An  MS–ISAC  analyst/liaison  is  collocated  in 
the NCCIC. 

Private industry owns and operates the vast majority of the Nation’s critical infra-
structure  and  cyber  networks.  Consequently,  the  private  sector  plays  an  important 
role in cybersecurity, and DHS has initiated several pilot programs to promote pub-
lic-private sector collaboration. In its engagement with the private sector, DHS rec-
ognizes the need to avoid technology prescription and to support innovation that en-
hances  critical  infrastructure  cybersecurity.  DHS,  through  the  National  Infrastruc-
ture  Protection  Plan  partnership  framework,  has  many  years  of  experience  in  pri-
vate  sector  collaboration,  leveraging  our  relationships  in  both  the  physical  and  cy-
bersecurity  protection  areas.  Within  current  legal  authorities,  DHS  engages  with 
the  private  sector  on  a  voluntary  basis.  We  stand  by  to  assist  our  private  sector 
partners  upon  their  request,  and  thus  far  have  been  able  to  do  so  successfully  due 
to  our  technical  capabilities,  existing  private  sector  relationships,  and  expertise  in 
matters relating to privacy and civil rights and civil liberties. 

In  February  2010,  DHS,  DoD,  and  the  Financial  Services  Information  Sharing 
and  Analysis  Center  (FS–ISAC)  launched  a  pilot  designed  to  help  protect  key  crit-
ical  networks  and  infrastructure  within  the  financial  services  sector  by  sharing  ac-
tionable, sensitive information. Based on lessons learned from the pilot, DHS is de-
veloping  comprehensive  information-sharing  and  incident  response  coordination 
processes  with  CIKR  sectors,  leveraging  capabilities  from  within  DHS  and  across 
the response community, through the NCCIC. 

In  June  2010,  DHS  implemented  the  Cybersecurity  Partner  Local  Access  Plan, 
which  allows  security-cleared  owners  and  operators  of  CIKR,  as  well  as  State  tech-
nology officials and law enforcement officials, to access secret-level cybersecurity in-
formation  and  video  teleconference  calls  via  State  and  local  fusion  centers.  In  No-
vember  2010,  DHS  signed  an  agreement  with  the  Information  Technology  Informa-
tion  Sharing  and  Analysis  Center  (IT–ISAC)  to  embed  a  full-time  IT–ISAC  analyst 
and  liaison  to  DHS  at  the  NCCIC,  part  of  the  on-going  effort  to  collocate  private 
sector  representatives  alongside  Federal  and  State  government  counterparts.  The 
IT–ISAC consists of information technology stakeholders from the private sector and 
facilitates cooperation among members to identify sector-specific vulnerabilities and 
risk mitigation strategies. 

In  July  2010,  DHS  worked  extensively  with  the  White  House  on  the  publication 
of a draft National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace, which seeks to se-
cure the digital identities of individuals, organizations, services, and devices during 
on-line  transactions,  as  well  as  the  infrastructure  supporting  the  transaction.  This 
fulfills  one  of  the  near-term  action  items  of  the  President’s  Cyberspace  Policy  Re-
view.  The  strategy  is  based  on  public-private  partnerships  and  supports  the  protec-
tion  of  privacy,  and  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties  by  enabling  only  the  minimum 
necessary amount of personal information to be transferred in any particular trans-
action. Its implementation will be led by the Department of Commerce. 

In December 2010, DHS and NIST signed a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council. The goal of the agreement is to 
speed  the  commercialization  of  cybersecurity  research  innovations  that  support  our 
Nation’s  critical  infrastructures.  This  agreement  will  accelerate  the  deployment  of 
network  test  beds  for  specific  use  cases  that  strengthen  the  resiliency,  security,  in-
tegrity, and usability of financial services and other critical infrastructures. 

While  considerable  activity  is  focused  on  public  and  private  sector  critical  infra-
structure  protection,  DHS  is  committed  to  developing  innovative  ways  to  enhance 
the general public’s awareness about the importance of safeguarding America’s com-
puter  systems  and  networks  from  attacks.  Every  October,  DHS  and  its  public  and 
private  sector  partners  promote  efforts  to  educate  citizens  about  guarding  against 
cyber  threats  as  part  of  National  Cybersecurity  Awareness  Month.  In  March  2010, 
Secretary  Napolitano  launched  the  National  Cybersecurity  Awareness  Challenge, 
which called on the general public and private sector companies to develop creative 
and innovative ways to enhance cybersecurity awareness. In July 2010, seven of the 
more  than  80  proposals  were  selected  and  recognized  at  a  White  House  ceremony. 
The winning proposals helped inform the development of the National Cybersecurity 
Awareness  Campaign,  Stop.  Think.  Connect.,  which  DHS  launched  in  conjunction 
with private sector partners during the October 2010 National Cybersecurity Aware-
ness Month. Stop. Think. Connect., a message developed with the private sector, has 
evolved  into  an  on-going  National  public  education  campaign  designed  to  increase 
public understanding of cyber threats and how individual citizens can develop safer 

14 

cyber habits that will help make networks more secure. The campaign fulfills a key 
element of President Obama’s Cyberspace Policy Review, which tasked DHS with de-
veloping a public awareness campaign to inform Americans about ways to use tech-
nology  safely.  The  program  is  part  of  the  NIST  National  Initiative  for  Cyber  Edu-
cation (NICE). 

Throughout  its  public  and  private  sector  activities,  DHS  is  committed  to  sup-
porting the public’s privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties. Accordingly, the Depart-
ment  has  implemented  strong  privacy  and  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties  standards 
into  all  of  its  cybersecurity  programs  and  initiatives  from  the  outset.  To  support 
this,  DHS  established  an  Oversight  and  Compliance  Officer  within  NPPD,  and  key 
cybersecurity  personnel  receive  specific  training  on  the  protection  of  privacy  and 
other  civil  liberties  as  they  relate  to  computer  network  security  activities.  In  an  ef-
fort to increase transparency, DHS also publishes privacy impact assessments on its 
website, www.dhs.gov, for all of its cybersecurity systems. 

CONCLUSION 

Set  within  an  environment  characterized  by  a  dangerous  combination  of  known 
and  unknown  vulnerabilities,  strong  and  rapidly  expanding  adversary  capabilities, 
and  a  lack  of  comprehensive  threat  and  vulnerability  awareness,  the  cybersecurity 
mission is truly a National one requiring collaboration across the homeland security 
enterprise.  The  Department  of  Homeland  Security  is  committed  to  creating  a  safe, 
secure,  and  resilient  cyber  environment  while  promoting  cybersecurity  knowledge 
and innovation. We must continue to secure today’s infrastructure as we prepare for 
tomorrow’s challenges and opportunities. It is important to recognize that we do not 
undertake  cybersecurity  for  the  sake  of  security  itself,  but  rather  to  ensure  that 
Government,  business,  and  critical  societal  functions  can  continue  to  use  the  infor-
mation technology and communications infrastructure on which they depend. 

Within  our  current  legal  authorities,  DHS  continues  to  engage  and  collaborate 
with partners in the private and public sectors. We are deploying intrusion detection 
and  prevention  technologies  across  the  Federal  enterprise,  aiding  departments  and 
agencies in securing their networks, and providing analysis, vulnerability, and miti-
gation  assistance  to  private  sector  CIKR  partners.  Our  continued  dedication  to  pri-
vacy, civil rights, and civil liberties ensures a positive, sustainable model for cyber-
security  engagement  in  the  future.  Finally,  we  work  closely  with  our  interagency 
partners in law enforcement and intelligence, providing the full complement of Fed-
eral  capabilities  in  preparation  for,  and  in  response  to,  significant  cyber  incidents. 
Chairman Lungren, Vice Chairman Walberg, Ranking Member Clarke, and distin-
guished Members of the subcommittee, let me end by reiterating that I look forward 
to  exploring  opportunities  to  advance  this  mission  in  collaboration  with  the  sub-
committee and my colleagues in the public and private sectors. Thank you again for 
this opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer your questions. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Thank you very much, Mr. Reitinger. 
Now  Mr.  Wilshusen,  who  is  looking  forward  to  tomorrow’s  bas-
ketball  game,  if  you  could  give  us  about  5  minutes  of  your  best 
pitch right now and then we can ask questions. 

STATEMENT  OF  GREGORY  WILSHUSEN,  DIRECTOR  OF  INFOR-
MATION SECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY 
OFFICE 
Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke, 
and  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  thank  you  for  the  opportunity 
to  testify  at  today’s  hearing  on  cyber  threats  to  critical  infrastruc-
ture and the American economy. 

As  you  mentioned  in  your  opening  statements,  pervasive  and 
sustained  cyber  attacks  against  the  United  States  continue  to 
threaten  Federal  and  non-Federal  systems  and  operations.  The 
every-increasing interdependence on these systems to carry out es-
sential  everyday  operations  and  activities  makes  us  vulnerable  to 
a wide array of cyber-based threats. Thus, it is increasingly impor-
tant  that  Federal  and  non-Federal  entities  carry  out  concerted  ef-
forts  to  safeguard  their  systems  and  the  information  they  contain. 

15 

Mr. Chairman, today we will discuss the threats to cyber-reliant 
critical  infrastructures  and  with  Federal  information  systems  and 
the challenges agencies face in protecting them. 

Cyber  threats  to  critical  infrastructure  and  Federal  services  are 
evolving  and  growing  and  can  come  from  a  variety  of  sources,  in-
cluding  criminals  and  foreign  nations,  as  well  as  hackers  and  dis-
gruntled  employees.  It  is  important  not  to  forget  about  the  insider 
threat.  Potential  hackers  have  a  variety  of  techniques  at  their  dis-
posal  that  can  vastly  expand  the  risk,  the  reach,  and  impact  of 
their  operations,  including  use  of  social  engineering  and  malicious 
software.  The  interconnectivity  between  information  systems,  the 
internet, and other infrastructure also presents increasing opportu-
nities for such attacks. Not surprisingly, security incidents reported 
by  Federal  agencies  are  on  the  rise,  increasing  over  650  percent 
during the past 5 years to nearly 42,000 in fiscal year 2010. 

Cyber  attack  incidents  can  seriously  impact  our  National  and 
economic  security  and  have  resulted  in  the  loss  of  classified  infor-
mation  and  intellectual  property,  and  financial  crimes  reportedly 
totaling  billions  of  dollars.  Although  the  administration  and  Fed-
eral  agencies  continue  to  act  to  strengthen  the  Nation’s  cybersecu-
rity  posture,  challenges  remain.  Key  actions  to  improve  our  Na-
tional  approach  to  cybersecurity  have  not  been  fully  implemented, 
Federal capacity to protect against cyber threats needs to improve, 
and  Federal  agencies  have  not  fully  addressed  persistent  control 
weaknesses or consistently implemented effective information secu-
rity  programs.  For  these  reasons,  GAO  once  again  identified  pro-
tecting the Federal Government’s information systems and the Na-
tion’s  critical  infrastructure  as  a  Government-wide  high-risk  area 
in its biennial report to the Congress on high-risk Government pro-
grams. 

Mr.  Chairman,  much  work  remains  to  be  done.  Additional  Fed-
eral  efforts  are  needed  to  implement  actions  recommended  by  the 
President’s Cybersecurity Policy Review, update the National strat-
egy  for  securing  the  information  and  communications  infrastruc-
ture,  develop  a  National  strategy  for  addressing  the  global  aspects 
of  cybersecurity,  and  create  a  prioritized  National  and  Federal  cy-
bersecurity research and development agenda. 

Federal  agencies,  and  in  particular  DHS,  need  to  enhance  their 
cyber analysis and warning capabilities and help strengthen the ef-
fectiveness  of  public-private  sector  partnerships  in  securing  cyber 
critical  infrastructure.  Federal  agencies  also  need  to  mitigate 
known  vulnerabilities,  fully  implement  comprehensive  information 
security programs, and facilitate Government-wide efforts to secure 
their systems. 

GAO has made numerous recommendations to assist agencies in 
these  areas,  and  agencies  have  implemented  or  are  in  the  process 
of implementing many of them. 

In  summary,  Mr.  Chairman,  the  threats  to  information  systems 
are  evolving  and  growing,  and  systems  supporting  Federal  oper-
ations  and  the  Nation’s  critical  infrastructures  are  not  sufficiently 
protected  to  consistently  thwart  those  threats.  Until  the  adminis-
tration  and  Federal  agencies  working  with  the  private  sector  fully 
address the challenges before them, our Nation’s cybersecurity crit-
ical infrastructure will remain vulnerable. 

16 

Mr.  Chairman,  this  concludes  my  statement.  I  would  be  happy 

to answer any questions. 

[The statement of Mr. Wilshusen follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF GREGORY WILSHUSEN 

MARCH 16, 2011 

CYBERSECURITY: CONTINUED ATTENTION NEEDED TO PROTECT OUR NATION’S CRITICAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE AND FEDERAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS 

Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke, and Members of the subcommittee: 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  at  today’s  hearing  on  the  cyber  threats  to 
critical infrastructure and the American economy. 

Pervasive and sustained cyber attacks against the United States continue to pose 
a  potentially  devastating  impact  on  Federal  and  non-Federal  systems  and  oper-
ations. In February 2011, the Director of National Intelligence testified that, in the 
past  year,  there  had  been  a  dramatic  increase  in  malicious  cyber  activity  targeting 
U.S. computers and networks, including a more than tripling of the volume of mali-
cious  software  since  2009.1 Recent  press  reports  that  computer  hackers  broke  into 
and stole proprietary information worth millions of dollars from the networks of six 
U.S.  and  European  energy  companies  also  demonstrate  the  risk  that  our  Nation 
faces.  Such  attacks  highlight  the  importance  of  developing  a  concerted  response  to 
safeguard Federal and non-Federal information systems. 

Mr.  Chairman,  GAO  recently  issued  its  high-risk  list  of  Government  programs 
that have greater vulnerability to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement or need 
transformation  to  address  economy,  efficiency,  or  effectiveness  challenges.2 Once 
again,  we  identified  protecting  the  Federal  Government’s  information  systems  and 
the  Nation’s  cyber  critical  infrastructure  as  a  Government-wide  high-risk  area.  We 
have  designated  Federal  information  security  as  a  high-risk  area  since  1997;  in 
2003, we expanded this high-risk area to include protecting systems supporting our 
Nation’s critical infrastructure, referred to as cyber critical infrastructure protection 
or cyber CIP. 

In  my  testimony  today  I  will  describe:  (1)  Cyber  threats  to  cyber-reliant  critical 
infrastructures  and  Federal  information  systems  and  (2)  the  continuing  challenges 
Federal agencies face in protecting the Nation’s cyber-reliant critical infrastructures 
and  Federal  systems.  In  preparing  this  statement  in  March  2011,  we  relied  on  our 
previous work in these areas (please see the related GAO products page at the end 
of this statement). These products contain detailed overviews of the scope and meth-
odology  we  used.  The  work  on  which  this  statement  is  based  was  performed  in  ac-
cordance  with  generally  accepted  Government  auditing  standards.  Those  standards 
require  that  we  plan  and  perform  audits  to  obtain  sufficient,  appropriate  evidence 
to  provide  a  reasonable  basis  for  our  findings  and  conclusions  based  on  our  audit 
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our 
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 

BACKGROUND 

As  computer  technology  has  advanced,  Federal  agencies  and  our  Nation’s  critical 
infrastructures 3—such  as  power  distribution,  water  supply,  telecommunications, 
and  emergency  services—have  become  increasingly  dependent  on  computerized  in-
formation systems to carry out their operations and to process, maintain, and report 
essential information. Public and private organizations rely on computer systems to 
transfer  increasing  amounts  of  money  and  sensitive  and  proprietary  information, 
conduct operations, and deliver services to constituents. 

The security of these systems and data is essential to protecting National and eco-
nomic security, and public health and safety. Conversely, ineffective information se-
curity  controls  can  result  in  significant  risks,  including  the  loss  of  resources,  such 
as  Federal  payments  and  collections;  inappropriate  access  to  sensitive  information, 
such as National security information, personal information on taxpayers, or propri-

1 Director  of  National  Intelligence,  Statement  for  the  Record  on  the  Worldwide  Threat  Assess-
ment  of  the  U.S.  Intelligence  Community,  statement  before  the  Senate  Select  Committee  on  In-
telligence (Feb. 16, 2011). 

2 GAO, High-Risk Series: An Update, (Washington, DC: February 2011). 
3 Critical  infrastructures  are  systems  and  assets,  whether  physical  or  virtual,  so  vital  to  the 
Nation  that  their  incapacity  or  destruction  would  have  a  debilitating  impact  on  National  secu-
rity,  National  economic  security,  National  public  health  or  safety,  or  any  combination  of  those 
matters. 

17 

etary business information; disruption of critical operations supporting critical infra-
structure, National defense, or emergency services; and undermining of agency mis-
sions due to embarrassing incidents that diminish public confidence in Government. 
CYBER-RELIANT CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND FEDERAL SYSTEMS FACE INCREASING 

CYBER THREATS 

Threats to systems supporting critical infrastructure and Federal information sys-
tems  are  evolving  and  growing.  Government  officials  are  concerned  about  attacks 
from individuals and groups with malicious intent, such as criminals, terrorists, and 
foreign  nations.  Federal  law  enforcement  and  intelligence  agencies  have  identified 
multiple  sources  of  threats  to  our  Nation’s  critical  information  systems,  including 
foreign  nations  engaged  in  espionage  and  information  warfare,  criminals,  hackers, 
virus writers, and disgruntled employees and contractors. These groups and individ-
uals have a variety of attack techniques at their disposal that can be used to deter-
mine vulnerabilities and gain entry into targeted systems. For example, phishing in-
volves  the  creation  and  use  of  fake  e-mails  and  websites  to  deceive  internet  users 
into disclosing their personal data and other sensitive information. 

The connectivity between information systems, the internet, and other infrastruc-
tures  also  creates  opportunities  for  attackers  to  disrupt  telecommunications,  elec-
trical power, and other critical services. For example, in May 2008, we reported that 
the Tennessee Valley Authority’s (TVA) corporate network contained security weak-
nesses  that  could  lead  to  the  disruption  of  control  systems  networks  and  devices 
connected  to  that  network.4 We  made  19  recommendations  to  improve  the  imple-
mentation  of  information  security  program  activities  for  the  control  systems  gov-
erning  TVA’s  critical  infrastructures  and  73  recommendations  to  address  weak-
nesses  in  information  security  controls.  TVA  concurred  with  the  recommendations 
and  has  taken  steps  to  implement  them.  As  Government,  private  sector,  and  per-
sonal  activities  continue  to  move  to  networked  operations,  the  threat  will  continue 
to grow. 
Reported Security Incidents Are on the Rise 

Consistent  with  the  evolving  and  growing  nature  of  the  threats  to  Federal  sys-
tems, agencies are reporting an increasing number of security incidents. These inci-
dents  put  sensitive  information  at  risk.  Personally  identifiable  information  about 
U.S.  citizens  has  been  lost,  stolen,  or  improperly  disclosed,  thereby  potentially  ex-
posing those individuals to loss of privacy, identity theft, and financial crimes. Agen-
cies  have  experienced  a  wide  range  of  incidents  involving  data  loss  or  theft,  com-
puter intrusions, and privacy breaches, underscoring the need for improved security 
practices. Further, reported attacks and unintentional incidents involving critical in-
frastructure systems demonstrate that a serious attack could be devastating. 

When incidents occur, agencies are to notify the Federal information security inci-
dent  center—the  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT). 
Over the past 5 years, the number of incidents reported by Federal agencies to US– 
CERT has increased dramatically, from 5,503 incidents reported in fiscal year 2006 
to  about  41,776  incidents  in  fiscal  year  2010  (a  more  than  650  percent  increase). 
The  three  most  prevalent  types  of  incidents  and  events  reported  to  US–CERT  dur-
ing fiscal year 2010 were: (1) Malicious code (software that infects an operating sys-
tem or application), (2) improper usage (a violation of acceptable computing use poli-
cies), and (3) unauthorized access (where an individual gains logical or physical ac-
cess  to  a  system  without  permission).  Additionally,  according  to  Department  of 
Homeland Security (DHS) officials, US–CERT detects incidents and events through 
its  intrusion  detection  system,  supplemented  by  agency  reports,  for  investigation 
(unconfirmed incidents that are potentially malicious or anomalous activity deemed 
by the reporting entity to warrant further review). 

Reports  of  cyber  attacks  and  information  security  incidents  against  Federal  sys-
tems  and  systems  supporting  critical  infrastructure  illustrate  the  effect  that  such 
incidents could have on National and economic security. 
• In  July  2010,  the  Department  of  Defense  (DOD)  launched  an  investigation  to 
identify  how  thousands  of  classified  military  documents  (including  Afghanistan 
and Iraq war operations, as well as field reports on Pakistan) were obtained by 
the  group  WikiLeaks.org.  According  to  DOD,  this  investigation  was  related  to 
an on-going investigation of an Army private charged with, among other things, 
transmitting National defense information to an unauthorized source. 

4 GAO,  Information  Security:  TVA  Needs  to  Address  Weaknesses  in  Control  Systems  and  Net-

works, (Washington, DC: May 21, 2008). 

18 

• In 2010, the Deputy Secretary of Defense stated that DOD suffered a significant 
compromise of its classified military computer networks in 2008. It began when 
a  flash  drive’s  malicious  computer  code,  placed  there  by  a  foreign  intelligence 
agency, uploaded itself onto a network and spread on both classified and unclas-
sified systems.5 
• In  February  2011,  media  reports  stated  that  computer  hackers  broke  into  and 
stole proprietary information worth millions of dollars from the networks of six 
U.S. and European energy companies. 

THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN ACTIONS TO ADDRESS CYBER THREATS, BUT 

CHALLENGES REMAIN IN PROTECTING CRITICAL SYSTEMS 

The  Federal  Government  has  a  variety  of  roles  and  responsibilities  in  protecting 
the  Nation’s  cyber-reliant  critical  infrastructure,  enhancing  the  Nation’s  overall  cy-
bersecurity  posture,  and  ensuring  the  security  of  Federal  systems  and  the  informa-
tion  they  contain.  In  light  of  the  pervasive  and  increasing  threats  to  critical  sys-
tems,  the  Executive  branch  is  taking  a  number  of  steps  to  strengthen  the  Nation’s 
approach to cybersecurity. For example, in its role as the focal point for Federal ef-
forts to protect the Nation’s cyber critical infrastructures,6 DHS issued a revised Na-
tional infrastructure protection plan in 2009 and an interim National cyber incident 
response  plan  in  2010.  Executive  branch  agencies  have  also  made  progress  insti-
tuting  several  Government-wide  initiatives  that  are  aimed  at  bolstering  aspects  of 
Federal  cybersecurity,  such  as  reducing  the  number  of  Federal  access  points  to  the 
internet,  establishing  security  configurations  for  desktop  computers,  and  enhancing 
situational  awareness  of  cyber  events.  Despite  these  efforts,  the  Federal  Govern-
ment continues to face significant challenges in protecting the Nation’s cyber-reliant 
critical infrastructure and Federal information systems. 
Key  Actions  to  Improve  Our  Current  National  Approach  to  Cybersecurity  Have  Not 

Yet Been Fully Implemented 

The administration and Executive branch agencies have not yet fully implemented 
key  actions  that  are  intended  to  address  threats  and  improve  the  current  U.S.  ap-
proach to cybersecurity. 
• Implementing  actions  recommended  by  the  President’s  Cybersecurity  Policy  Re-
view.  In  February  2009,  the  President  initiated  a  review  of  the  Government’s 
cybersecurity  policies  and  structures,  which  resulted  in  24  near-  and  mid-term 
recommendations  to  address  organizational  and  policy  changes  to  improve  the 
current  U.S.  approach  to  cybersecurity.7 In  October  2010,  we  reported  that  2 
recommendations  had  been  implemented  and  22  were  partially  implemented.8 
Officials  from  key  agencies  involved  in  these  efforts  (e.g.,  DHS,  DOD,  and  the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB)) stated that progress had been slower 
than  expected  because  agencies  lacked  assigned  roles  and  responsibilities  and 
because  several  of  the  mid-term  recommendations  would  require  action  over 
multiple  years.  We  recommended  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinator 
(whose role was established as a result of the policy review) designate roles and 
responsibilities  for  each  recommendation  and  develop  milestones  and  plans,  in-
cluding measures to show agencies’ progress and performance. 
• Updating  the  National  strategy  for  securing  the  information  and  communica-
tions  infrastructure.  In  March  2009,  we  testified  on  the  needed  improvements 
to  the  Nation’s  cybersecurity  strategy.9 In  preparation  for  that  testimony,  we 
convened  a  panel  of  experts  that  included  former  Federal  officials,  academics, 
and private sector executives. The panel highlighted 12 key improvements that 
are, in its view, essential to improving the strategy and our National cybersecu-
rity  posture,  including  the  development  of  a  National  strategy  that  clearly  ar-
ticulates strategic objectives, goals, and priorities. 
• Developing  a  comprehensive  National  strategy  for  addressing  global  cybersecu-
rity and governance. In July 2010, we reported that the U.S. Government faced 
a  number  of  challenges  in  formulating  and  implementing  a  coherent  approach 

5 Foreign  Affairs,  Defending  a  New  Domain:  The  Pentagon’s  Cyberstrategy,  William  J.  Lynn 

III, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense (New York, NY: September/October 2010). 

6 As  established  by  Federal  law  and  policy,  including  the  Homeland  Security  Act  of  2002, 
Homeland  Security  Presidential  Directive—7,  and  the  National  Strategy  to  Secure  Cyberspace. 
7 The  White  House,  Cyberspace  Policy  Review:  Assuring  a  Trusted  and  Resilient  Information 

and Communications Infrastructure (Washington, DC: May 29, 2009). 

8 GAO, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy Re-
view Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO–11–24 (Washington, DC: Oct. 
6, 2010). 

9 GAO,  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy:  Key  Improvements  Are  Needed  to  Strengthen  the  Na-

tion’s Posture, GAO–09–432T (Washington, DC: Mar. 10, 2009). 

19 

to  global  aspects  of  cyberspace,  including,  among  other  things,  providing  top- 
level  leadership  and  developing  a  comprehensive  strategy.10 Specifically,  we 
found  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinator’s  authority  and  capacity  to 
effectively  coordinate  and  forge  a  coherent  National  approach  to  cybersecurity 
were  still  under  development.  In  addition,  the  U.S.  Government  had  not  docu-
mented a clear vision of how the international efforts of Federal entities, taken 
together,  support  overarching  National  goals.  We  recommended  that,  among 
other  things,  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coordinator  develop  with  other  rel-
evant entities a comprehensive U.S. global cyberspace strategy. The coordinator 
and  his  staff  concurred  with  our  recommendations  and  stated  that  actions  had 
already been initiated to address them. 
• Finalizing  cybersecurity  guidelines  and  monitoring  compliance  related  to  elec-
tricity  grid  modernization.  In  January  2011,  we  reported  on  efforts  by  the  Na-
tional  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  to  develop  cybersecurity 
guidelines  and  Federal  Energy  Regulatory  Commission  (FERC)  efforts  to  adopt 
and monitor cybersecurity standards related to the electric industry’s incorpora-
tion  of  IT  systems  to  improve  reliability  and  efficiency—commonly  referred  to 
as  the  smart  grid.11 We  determined  that  NIST  had  not  addressed  all  key  ele-
ments  of  cybersecurity  in  its  initial  guidelines  or  finalized  plans  for  doing  so. 
We  also  determined  that  FERC  had  not  developed  an  approach  for  monitoring 
industry  compliance  with  its  initial  set  of  voluntary  standards.  Further,  we 
identified  six  key  challenges  with  respect  to  securing  smart  grid  systems,  in-
cluding  a  lack  of  security  features  being  built  into  certain  smart  grid  systems 
and  an  ineffective  mechanism  for  sharing  information  on  cybersecurity  within 
the industry. We recommended that NIST finalize its plans for updating its cy-
bersecurity  guidelines  to  incorporate  missing  elements  and  that  FERC  develop 
a  coordinated  approach  to  monitor  voluntary  standards  and  address  any  gaps 
in compliance. Both agencies agreed with these recommendations. 
• Creating a prioritized National and Federal cybersecurity research and develop-
ment  (R&D)  agenda.  In  June  2010,  we  reported  that  while  efforts  to  improve 
cybersecurity  R&D  were  under  way  by  the  White  House’s  Office  Science  and 
Technology  Policy  (OSTP)  and  other  Federal  entities,  six  major  challenges  im-
peded these efforts.12 Among the most critical was the lack of a prioritized Na-
tional  cybersecurity  research  and  development  agenda.  We  found  that  despite 
its  legal  responsibility  and  our  past  recommendations,  a  key  OSTP  sub-
committee  had  not  created  a  prioritized  National  R&D  agenda,  increasing  the 
risk that research pursued by individual organizations will not reflect National 
priorities. We recommended that OSTP direct the subcommittee to take several 
actions,  including  developing  a  National  cybersecurity  R&D  agenda.  OSTP 
agreed with our recommendation and provided details on planned actions. 

We  are  in  the  process  of  verifying  actions  taken  to  implement  our  recommenda-
tions.  In  addition,  we  have  on-going  work  related  to  cyber  CIP  efforts  in  several 
other  areas  including:  (1)  Cybersecurity-related  standards  used  by  critical  infra-
structure sectors, (2) Federal efforts to recruit, retain, train, and develop cybersecu-
rity  professionals,  and  (3)  Federal  efforts  to  address  risks  to  the  information  tech-
nology supply chain. 
Federal Capacity to Protect Against Cyber Threats Needs to Improve 

In  addition  to  improving  our  National  capability  to  address  cybersecurity,  Execu-
tive branch agencies, in particular DHS, also need to improve their capacity to pro-
tect  against  cyber  threats  by,  among  other  things,  advancing  cyber  analysis  and 
warning capabilities and strengthening the effectiveness of the public-private sector 
partnerships in securing cyber critical infrastructure. 
• Enhancing  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capabilities.  In  July  2008,  we  reported 
that  DHS’s  US–CERT  had  not  fully  addressed  15  key  attributes  of  cyber  anal-
ysis  and  warning  capabilities.13 As  a  result,  we  recommended  that  the  Depart-
ment address shortfalls associated with the 15 attributes in order to fully estab-
lish  a  National  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capability  as  envisioned  in  the  Na-
tional  strategy.  DHS  agreed  in  large  part  with  our  recommendations  and  has 
reported  that  it  is  taking  steps  to  implement  them.  We  are  currently  working 

10 GAO,  Cyberspace:  United  States  Faces  Challenges  in  Addressing  Global  Cybersecurity  and 

Governance, GAO–10–606 (Washington, DC: July 2, 2010). 

11 GAO, Electricity Grid Modernization: Progress Being Made on Cybersecurity Guidelines, but 

Key Challenges Remain to be Addressed, GAO–11–117 (Washington, DC: Jan. 12, 2011). 

12 GAO, Cybersecurity: Key Challenges Need to Be Addressed to Improve Research and Develop-

ment, GAO–10–466 (Washington, DC: June 3, 2010). 

13 GAO, Cyber Analysis and Warning: DHS Faces Challenges in Establishing a Comprehensive 

National Capability, GAO–08–588 (Washington, DC: Jul. 31, 2008). 

20 

with DHS officials to determine the status of their efforts to address these rec-
ommendations. 
• Strengthening  the  public-private  partnerships  for  securing  cyber  critical  infra-
structure.  In  July  2010,  we  reported  that  the  expectations  of  private  sector 
stakeholders  were  not  being  met  by  their  Federal  partners  in  areas  related  to 
sharing  information  about  cyber-based  threats  to  critical  infrastructure.14 Fed-
eral partners, such as DHS, were taking steps that may address the key expec-
tations  of  the  private  sector,  including  developing  new  information-sharing  ar-
rangements.  We  also  reported  that  public  sector  stakeholders  believed  that  im-
provements  could  be  made  to  the  partnership,  including  improving  private  sec-
tor sharing of sensitive information. We recommended that the National Cyber-
security Coordinator and DHS work with their Federal and private sector part-
ners to enhance information-sharing efforts, including leveraging a central focal 
point for sharing information among the private sector, civilian government, law 
enforcement, the military, and the intelligence community. DHS officials stated 
that  they  have  made  progress  in  addressing  these  recommendations,  and  we 
will  be  determining  the  extent  of  that  progress  as  part  of  our  audit  follow-up 
efforts. 

Federal Agencies Have Not Addressed Persistent Control Weaknesses or Implemented 

Effective Information Security Programs 

Federal systems continue to be afflicted by persistent information security control 
weaknesses.  Specifically,  agencies  did  not  consistently  implement  effective  controls 
to prevent, limit, and detect unauthorized access or manage the configuration of net-
work  devices  to  prevent  unauthorized  access  and  ensure  system  integrity.  Most  of 
the  24  major  Federal  agencies  had  information  security  weaknesses  in  five  key  in-
ternal  control  categories,15 as  illustrated  in  Figure  1.  In  addition,  GAO  determined 
that serious and widespread information security control deficiencies were a Govern-
ment-wide  material  weakness  in  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  part  of 
its  audit  of  the  fiscal  year  2010  financial  statements  for  the  United  States  Govern-
ment. 

14 GAO,  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection:  Key  Private  and  Public  Cyber  Expectations  Need  to 

Be Consistently Addressed, GAO–10–628 (Washington, DC: July 15, 2010). 

15 The five internal controls are access controls, which ensure that only authorized individuals 
can read, alter, or delete data; configuration management controls, which provide assurance that 
only  authorized  software  programs  are  implemented;  segregation  of  duties,  which  reduces  the 
risk that one individual can independently perform inappropriate actions without detection; con-
tinuity  of  operations  planning,  which  provides  for  the  prevention  of  significant  disruptions  of 
computer-dependent  operations;  and  an  agency-wide  information  security  program  (security 
management),  which  provides  the  framework  for  ensuring  that  risks  are  understood  and  that 
effective controls are selected and properly implemented. 

21 

Over  the  past  several  years,  we  and  inspectors  general  have  made  hundreds  of 
recommendations  to  agencies  for  actions  necessary  to  resolve  prior  significant  con-
trol  deficiencies  and  information  security  program  shortfalls.  For  example,  we  rec-
ommended  that  agencies  correct  specific  information  security  deficiencies  related  to 
user identification and authentication, authorization, boundary protections, cryptog-
raphy, audit and monitoring, physical security, configuration management, segrega-
tion  of  duties,  and  contingency  planning.  We  have  also  recommended  that  agencies 
fully  implement  comprehensive,  agency-wide  information  security  programs  by  cor-
recting  weaknesses  in  risk  assessments,  information  security  policies  and  proce-
dures, security planning, security training, system tests and evaluations, and reme-
dial actions. The effective implementation of these recommendations will strengthen 
the  security  posture  at  these  agencies.  Agencies  have  implemented  or  are  in  the 
process of implementing many of our recommendations. 

In  addition,  the  White  House,  OMB,  and  selected  Federal  agencies  have  under-
taken Government-wide initiatives to enhance information security at Federal agen-
cies.  For  example,  the  Comprehensive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative,  a  series  of 
12  projects,  is  aimed  primarily  at  improving  DHS’s  and  other  Federal  agencies’  ef-
forts to reduce vulnerabilities, protect against intrusion attempts, and anticipate fu-
ture  threats  against  Federal  Executive  branch  information  systems.  However,  the 
projects  face  challenges  in  achieving  their  objectives  related  to  securing  Federal  in-
formation,  including  better  defining  agency  roles  and  responsibilities,  establishing 
measures  of  effectiveness,  and  establishing  an  appropriate  level  of  transparency. 
These challenges require sustained attention, which agencies have begun to provide. 
In  summary,  the  threats  to  information  systems  are  evolving  and  growing,  and 
systems supporting our Nation’s critical infrastructure and Federal systems are not 
sufficiently protected to consistently thwart the threats. Administration and Execu-
tive branch agencies need to take actions to improve our Nation’s cybersecurity pos-
ture, including implementing the actions recommended by the President’s cybersecu-
rity  policy  review  and  enhancing  cyber  analysis  and  warning  capabilities.  In  addi-
tion,  actions  are  needed  to  enhance  security  over  Federal  systems  and  information, 
including fully developing and effectively implementing agency-wide information se-
curity  programs  and  implementing  open  recommendations.  Until  these  actions  are 
taken,  our  Nation’s  Federal  and  non-Federal  cyber  critical  infrastructure  will  re-
main  vulnerable.  Mr.  Chairman,  this  completes  my  statement.  I  would  be  happy  to 
answer any questions you or other Members of the subcommittee have at this time. 
Mr. LUNGREN. Thank you very much. We will now start a round 

of questioning, and I yield myself 5 minutes. 

Mr. Reitinger, it is so easy to be a Monday morning quarterback. 
As  we  look  at  what  is  happening  in  Japan,  you  see  the  effects  of 
one  of  the  largest  recorded,  most  powerful  earthquakes  in  history, 
a tsunami that, if you watch it via the internet, if you watch it via 
YouTube, you see something that is stronger than any words could 
present.  Then  you  see  the  resulting  failure  at  the  nuclear  power 
plants.  I  wonder  if  Japan,  in  analyzing  threats,  would  ever  have 
seen that triple whammy scenario. 

So I wonder what is it that you worry most about, Mr. Reitinger? 
The only reason I ask you that is, I think we need to do something 
to  get  a  sense  of  urgency  about  this  particular  subject  matter,  not 
only  in  the  Congress,  but  in  the  public  at  large.  So  what  is  the 
most  serious  threat  that  you  see  to  our  critical  infrastructure  as  a 
result  of  something  that  may  visit  it  by  way  of  cybersecurity,  or  a 
lack  of  cybersecurity,  an  invasion  of  our  cyber  system,  penetration 
of our cyber system. 

Mr. REITINGER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I  would  like  to  take  that  in  a  slightly  different  direction,  if  I 
might. The threats are very serious, but I think it is somewhat dif-
ficult  to  say  that  this  particular  vector  of  attack  is  greater  than 
this particular vector. Certainly I do worry very much about things 
like  attacks  on  control  systems,  where  it  is  not  just,  well,  we  can’t 
get access to our data, but we can’t have the power on; or it is not 
just we can’t get access to our data or somebody access to our data, 

22 

somebody  may  have  filled  with  our  data,  not  just  attacks  on  con-
fidentiality, but integrity. So if someone got access to a major med-
ical  database  and  changed  the  contents  of  it,  that  could  have  sig-
nificant consequences in terms of human life for a large number of 
people. 

But  what  concerns  me  the  most  is  not  any  of  those  particular 
things,  it  is  what  you  started  out  your  question  with.  Was  Japan 
fully prepared? As much as they prepared, were they prepared? Are 
we now prepared for that type of cyber attack and are we doing the 
things  that  we  need  to  do  now  to  be  ready  when  and  if  that  sort 
of event takes place? We have done considerable things to raise the 
priority of cybersecurity. 

Just  last  year,  the  Ranking  Member  mentioned  the  first-ever 
Quadrennial  Homeland  Security  Review  which  identified  cyberse-
curity as one of the top mission areas for the entire homeland secu-
rity enterprise on a par with protecting our borders and having do-
mestic security and providing resilience to disasters. On a par with 
those  things,  cybersecurity  is  just  as  important.  But  are  we,  as  a 
Nation, going to do the things that we need to do to make sure that 
we have got the capabilities and ability to respond across the public 
and  private  sectors?  Are  we  going  to  keep  the  focus  and  move  for-
ward rather than waiting to respond when it is too late? 

Mr.  LUNGREN.  Mr.  Wilshusen,  looking  at  your  report  and  your 
comments, your suggestion is we are not doing all that we need to 
do.  Can  you  outline,  in  your  opinion,  for  instance,  what  is  hin-
dering DHS’s cybersecurity mission right now? 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  Well,  I  think  there  are  probably  a  couple  of 
issues.  Just  to  echo  what  Mr.  Reitinger  mentioned,  too,  is  that 
preparation  is  key  in  order  to  address  these  threats  because  often 
you  may  not  know  exactly  what  will  happen,  but  you  will  need  to 
be able to respond to them and hopefully take corrective action be-
fore the need occurs. 

One  of  the  things  that  DHS  could  do  to  help  the  private  sector 
and  others  to  better  protect  their  systems  is  to  provide  clear,  ac-
tionable,  and  alert  threat  information  and  share  techniques  with 
the private sector to improve their security. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Is that not being done, in your opinion, to the ex-

tent necessary? 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  Well,  we  recently  completed  a  review  in  which 
we asked private sector organizations what its key expectations are 
of the private sector/public partnerships. Over 98 percent of the re-
spondents  indicated  that  having  actionable  and  timely  threat  and 
alert  information  was  essential  to  a  great  or  moderate  extent,  but 
only  27  percent  felt  that  they  were  actually  receiving  that  type  of 
information to a great or moderate extent. 

So clearly, one of the actions that DHS can do is to help provide 
value-added  services  to  its  constituents  and  to  the  private  sector. 
It is attempting to and has taken actions to help improve its cyber 
analysis  and  warning  capabilities,  but  as  Mr.  Reitinger  mentioned 
in his opening remarks, more needs to be done. 

Mr. LUNGREN. My time is up. 
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes. 
Ms.  CLARKE.  Mr.  Reitinger  and  Mr.  Wilshusen,  DHS  has  many 
detractors on any number of issues, but we want to make sure that 

23 

the right people are tasked with doing the job of addressing cyber-
security  to  our  critical  infrastructure.  The  other  agencies  in  the 
Federal  Government  with  considerable  cybersecurity  expertise  are 
the  NSA  and  the  DOD.  Is  DHS  the  proper  agency  to  lead  Federal 
cybersecurity  efforts?  Is  there  another  Federal  agency  that  should 
do this? 

Mr. REITINGER. Thank you, ma’am. I think I will start, if that is 

all right. 

I think DHS absolutely is the right place to lead efforts with re-
gard to Federal civilian systems and the private sector. I would like 
to  respond  in  part  of  response  to  your  question  to  what  Greg  had 
indicated. There is a long way to go in terms of being able to share 
the  right  information  with  the  private  sector.  We  have  made  sig-
nificant  strides.  If  you  just  take  the  last  couple  of  years,  at  the 
start  of  fiscal  year  2009,  DHS  and  the  entire  National  Cybersecu-
rity  Division  had,  I  think,  38  people  at  the  start  of  the  year.  Over 
the  last  2  years,  we  have  roughly  tripled  that,  and  then  roughly 
doubled it in 2009 and 2010, so we are up to about 240 right now. 
In  the  President’s  request  in  the  fiscal  year  2012  budget,  we  grow 
that to a little more than 400 people. 

So we are significantly expanding our people, and expanding our 
people  expands  our  capabilities.  I  think  Greg  would  tell  you  that 
we have done a lot. 

We have had significant successes, for example, in terms of shar-
ing  actionable  information.  We  are  in  the  course  of  a  pilot  right 
now  with  the  financial  services  sector  where  we  share  informa-
tion—and we partnered with DOD and the financial services sector 
for  this.  We  have  shared  literally  hundreds  of  pieces  of  actionable 
information  with  the  financial  services  sector,  which  has  also 
shared hundreds of pieces of information back to us. We then take 
that  information,  it  comes  back  to  us  in  an  itemized  form,  we  can 
glean  data  from  it  and  pass  that  out.  So  we  are  moving  forward 
on actionable activities that actually add value. 

There  are  lots  of  roles  to  play  here.  DOD  has  an  essential  role 
to  play  protecting  military  systems  and  providing  a  core  and  deep 
technical  expertise  in  the  National  Security  Agency  and  Cyber 
Command on which all of us in appropriate cases rely. We at DHS 
have  our  own  expertise.  For  example,  we  have  deployed,  in  the 
much  messier  environment  of  the  Federal  civilian  infrastructure, 
EINSTEIN  2,  which  is  a  system  designed  to  detect  attempts  to 
break into Federal civilian systems. Just last year, it detected over 
5.4  million  events.  We  have  not  done  that  in  a  unitary  network 
that is subject to command and control, but in, so far, 15 of 19 dif-
ferent  major  Federal  agencies  and  at  four  internet  service  pro-
viders. 

So  we  have  developed  the  expertise  on  how  to  act  in  that  envi-
ronment,  move  forward  to  protect  security,  and  to  protect  privacy 
at the same time. 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  I  would  just  like  to  add  that  DHS  is  building 
out  its  capabilities  to  provide  services  to  its  constituents.  It  has 
also  received  responsibility  for  providing  increased  oversight  and 
assistance  to  other  Federal  agencies  in  implementing  their  infor-
mation security programs and practices. 

24 

One of the issues confronting DHS, at least as we see it, do they 
have the proper authorities to do that? There are challenges associ-
ated  with  one  agency  providing  oversight  over  another  agency.  At 
present,  under  the  Federal  Information  Security  Management  Act, 
many  of  the  authorities  are  granted  to  the  Office  of  Management 
and  Budget.  But  last  year,  in  July,  OMB  assigned  some  of  those 
responsibilities  over  to  DHS,  and  DHS  is  working  to  build  out  its 
capacity to perform those services. 

Certainly,  as  you  mentioned  before  with  DOD  and  NSA,  they 
have  a  high  level  of  skill  and  capabilities  in  this  area.  To  my 
knowledge,  they  have  been  working  with  DHS  to  some  extent  in 
transferring some of those skills and abilities as DHS builds out its 
own capabilities. 

Ms. CLARKE. Just following up, Mr. Reitinger, on the EINSTEIN 
issue,  the  National  Cybersecurity  Division  is  currently  planning  to 
deploy five EINSTEIN monitors or five key nodes in the dot-gov do-
main  that  will  be  used  to  prevent  and  detect  intrusions  on  com-
puter  systems.  If  the  continuing  resolution  is  adopted  by  Congress 
and  you  don’t  receive  your  requested  funds  for  2011,  how  would  it 
affect  this  much-needed  project  and  the  request  for  $226.6  million 
in the fiscal year 2012 budget? 

Mr. REITINGER. Thank you, ma’am. 
I think the proposal under H.R. 1 would cut roughly $60 million 
from  the  entire  NPPD  budget.  It  is  actually  a  budget  cut  not  spe-
cifically  to  cyber,  but  more  broadly  to  NPPD,  but  there  is  no  way 
in  our  budget  to  do  that  without  a  cut  to  cyber.  So  a  big  chunk  of 
those  resources  would,  in  fact,  be  drawn  from  the  resources  we 
would  use  to  deploy  what  you  are  referring  to,  the  EINSTEIN  3 
system,  and  it  would  adversely  affect  the  time  line  for  deployment 
of those sensors, yes, ma’am, and our ability to provide advice and 
assistance to agencies on the data that we receive. 

Ms. CLARKE. Thank you very much. 
I yield back, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr.  LUNGREN.  Mr.  Reitinger,  you  are  not  here  to  testify  as  to 
whether  or  not  we  should  have  another  month  in  which  we  have 
a $228 billion addition to the debt, are you? I didn’t think so. 

Mr. Walberg is recognized for 5 minutes. 
Mr.  WALBERG.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman.  Thanks  to  the  panel 
for  being  here  talking  about  an  area  that  is  expanding  my  mind 
daily,  as  I  think  about  it—so  far  not  causing  me  a  lot  of  loss  of 
sleep because I know that there are people who are thinking about 
it regularly, but I appreciate your testimony this morning. 

The  question  I  would  just  begin  with  to  each  of  you  is  a  short 
question with an answer that probably I would ask you to consider 
answering  in  relationship  to  what  you  know  today  and  what  you 
perceive today. 

In which sector could a cyber attack do the most damage? 
Mr.  REITINGER.  So,  sir,  I  am  somewhat  hesitant  simply  because 
it  is  hard  to  say  that  one  sector  grown  large  is  critical  from  top  to 
bottom  whereas  another  sector  is  not  critical  from  top  to  bottom. 
There  are,  however,  critical  entities  in  many  sectors,  and  some  of 
the sectors we worry most about are, for example, financial services 
and electric power, primarily because those are sectors, along with 
information  and  communications,  where  you  notice  adverse  effects 

in  milliseconds—and  I  mean  that,  milliseconds—as  opposed  to  sec-
onds, minutes, hours, or days. 

25 

Mr. WALBERG. Thank you. 
Mr. Wilshusen. 
Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  I  would  agree  with  Mr.  Reitinger’s  remarks, 
particularly  as  it  relates  to  the  financial  services  and  electrical 
power sectors. 

There  was  an  incident  a  couple  years  ago  at  a  power  plant,  nu-
clear  power  plant  in  Alabama.  Now  this  was  an  unintended  inci-
dent,  it  was  not  due  to  a  cyber  attack,  but  it  does  represent  and 
illustrate  the  impact  that  could  occur  from  such  an  attack.  It  was 
due  to  an  equipment  failure  on  a  network  that  was  connected  to 
one of the control systems. Through a series of events that occurred 
as  a  result  of  that  equipment  failure,  the  plant  had  to  bring  down 
its  nuclear  reactor  for  a  time.  Its  due  to,  in  part,  because  of  the 
interconnectivity  of  these  systems  to  control  systems.  So  it  can 
have a potentially devastating effect. 

Certainly  on  the  financial  services  side,  there  have  been  numer-
ous  reports  where  literally  millions  of  dollars  have  been  lost  and 
absconded with through cyber attacks. 

Mr. WALBERG. Thank you. 
Mr.  Reitinger,  moving  on  from  that—and  I  would  suggest  that 
your  answers  coincided  with  my  thoughts,  as  elementary  as  they 
may be, in talking with energy providers and financial institutions 
in  the  past  several  weeks,  that  just  the  effect  of  a  keystroke  is 
amazing. 

But let me ask you, Mr. Reitinger, are private sector entities re-
sponsive  to  the  efforts  the  Government  makes  with  them  to  warn 
of threats and mitigate the consequence of attacks? What is the ex-
perience there? 

Mr.  REITINGER.  I  think,  sir,  you  would  find  that  the  experience 
in  the  private  sector  is  similar  to  that  in  Government  agencies. 
There are a lot of entities who get it and some who don’t. The pri-
vate  sector  has  created  wholly  new  technical  capabilities  over  the 
last 10 years and has itself built new ways of working together and 
sharing  information,  not  only  expanding  their  information  sharing 
and  analysis  centers,  but  creating  other  mechanisms  to  work  to-
gether. 

All  that  said,  we  are  not  yet  where  we  need  to  be  in  terms  of 
broad  awareness,  but  within  the  business  community  and  among 
individuals,  in  terms  of  what  the  threat  is  and  what  actions  they 
need  to  take.  One  of  the  things  that  we  are  trying  very  much  to 
do  in  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  is  do  less  of  the  talk-
ing  to  ourselves,  and  as  we  raise  awareness,  making  sure  we  are 
talking  to  the  right  people,  talking  not  just  to  CISs,  chief  informa-
tion security officers or chief risk management officers, but talking 
to  chief  financial  officers  and  chief  operating  officers,  the  people 
who cut the checks and say this will affect your bottom line. 

There is broad willingness and interest across the public and pri-
vate  sectors  to  work  together.  There  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  to 
have uniform action. 

Mr.  WALBERG.  Mr.  Wilshusen,  you  mentioned  that  the  Govern-
ment must improve the public-private partnership by improving in-

26 

formation  sharing.  What  are  some  specific  recommendations  you 
would have? 

Mr. WILSHUSEN. Well, one is, as I mentioned before, for DHS, in 
its  role  as  a  key  focal  point  with  dealing  with  the  private  sector, 
is  to  provide  actionable,  timely  notices  of  either  warnings,  threat 
warnings,  as  well  as  alerts  of  specific  actions  currently  underway. 
That has been one of the key services that the private sector orga-
nizations  have  indicated  that  they  expect  to  receive  but  have  not 
yet fully received to the levels of expectations. So that would be one 
area  that  DHS  could  work  on.  Indeed,  as  Mr.  Reitinger  mentioned 
earlier, they are taking steps to address those areas. 

Mr. WALBERG. I see my time is up. Thank you. 
Mr.  LUNGREN.  The  gentleman  from  Louisiana,  Mr.  Richmond,  is 

recognized for 5 minutes. 

Mr. RICHMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
I guess my question is for whoever wants to answer. Part of what 
at least I saw in the BP Horizon oil spill in Louisiana was that as 
soon as it happened, there was a clear chain of command and there 
was  a  set  up  protocol  and  people  who  took  over  at  certain  points. 
Do  we  have,  in  the  event  of  a  cyber  attack,  a  clear  chain  of  com-
mand  with  defined  roles  and  responsibilities  within  Government? 
Mr.  REITINGER.  Sir,  to  be  frank,  I  think  we  could  use  further 
clarity.  We  have  made  significant  strides  in  that  regard.  Overall, 
cyber incidents are going to be incredibly complex, and so it is hard 
to generalize. But it is clear that the President is in charge overall, 
that  with  regard  to  domestic  response,  the  Secretary  of  Homeland 
Security,  under  her  Homeland  Security  Act  and  authorities  under 
the  various  Presidential  directives,  is  responsible,  and  DOD  is  re-
sponsible  for  National  defense.  We  built  the  mechanisms  to  work 
effectively  together.  We  now  have  a  National  cyber  incident  re-
sponse  plan  that  defines  roles  and  responsibilities,  and  we  are 
going to continue to improve that as our experience develops. 

We have also established a mechanism so that two of the largest 
players—DOD  and  DHS—can  work  effectively  together,  notably 
signing  a  memorandum  of  agreement  which  was  driven,  I  will  tell 
you,  at  the  Secretarial  level;  so  directly  between  the  Secretary  of 
Homeland Security and the Secretary of Defense to enable effective 
synchronization between DOD. So we have a team of senior people, 
are deploying a team of senior people at NSA and Cyber Command, 
and  they  are  deploying  two  groups—one  from  NSA  and  one  from 
Cyber  Command—to  our  cyber  operation  center  so  they  can  effec-
tively support us. 

One  of  the  things  that  we  are  doing  in  DHS  is—and  this  is  not 
just  about  cyber,  it  is  also  about  infrastructure  protection—is,  as 
we  develop  capability,  we  are  becoming  an  operational  entity.  We 
think  it  is  very  important  that  we  be  not  about  discussing,  but 
about  doing  and  enabling  others  to  do.  So  that  is  where  our  focus 
is. 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  I  would  just  add  that  one  of  the  key  aspects  to 
this  that  would  also  be  helpful  to  have  a  straight  line  of  chain  of 
command  is  for  the  administration  and  Federal  agencies  to  estab-
lish  and  update  the  National  Policy  for  Securing  Cyberspace.  This 
is  a  document  that  is  many  years  old.  It  has  had  a  number  of 
issues  with  it  that  have  impeded  its  progress  in  being  able  to  be 

27 

implemented.  One  thing  that  needs  to  be  developed  is  just  a  clear 
articulation of the objectives, goals, and priorities for Federal agen-
cies  and  the  private  sector  to  implement  security  over  cyberspace 
and the systems that they operate. 

Mr. RICHMOND. Thank you. 
As  I  was  talking  to  my  community  health  centers  yesterday,  we 
started talking about electronic health records and they mentioned 
to  me  that  there  were  60  companies  just  in  my  area  that  provided 
those  services.  Then  I  started  thinking  about  smart  grids.  Do  we 
have  an  industry  standard  or  is  there  a  published  standard  that 
these  companies  have  to  have  in  relation  to  protecting  their  elec-
tronic  health  records?  Or  have  we  set  a  baseline  that  they  have  to 
at  least  adhere  to  to  make  sure  that  we  protect  people’s  privacy 
and we protect the risk of an attack in that area? 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  Well,  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human 
Services, under HIPAA, issues a security rule that health care pro-
viders  are  required  to  follow  certain  security  and  privacy  guide-
lines.  So  that  is  probably  as  close  as  anything  that  exists  to  a 
standard, if you will, or guidelines and requirements for protecting 
the confidentiality and integrity of health information. 

Mr.  RICHMOND.  But  under  HIPAA,  have  they—I  hate  to  put  it 
this  way,  have  they  gotten  to  the  level  of  sophistication  to  address 
cybersecurity  in  terms  of  protecting  those  health  records?  I  know 
traditionally  we  just  said  don’t  leak  people’s  medical  condition, 
don’t  publish  it,  you  have  to  protect  it  and  put  it  in  a  safe  place. 
But now when we start going to electronic health records, the ques-
tion is whether somebody has put out the technical guidelines and 
the technical responsibilities to make sure that at least those com-
panies are not easily hacked. That will be my question, and I yield 
back, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. WILSHUSEN. Well, the security rule does provide some guide-
lines,  but  probably  not  to  the  level  that  you  are  referring  to  in 
terms  of  the  very  detailed  technical  standards  that  may  be  re-
quired. 

One  of  the  issues  that  also  comes  up  is  in  terms  of  data  inter-
operability  between  various  different  health  organizations  and 
States  to  make  sure  that  this  health  information  is  actually  inter-
operable  among  different  States  as  they  develop  their  own  indi-
vidual  standards.  So  that  is  another  issue  that  is  attendant  to  the 
one you are asking about. 

Mr. LUNGREN. The gentleman’s time has expired. 
Mr. Meehan is recognized for 5 minutes. 
Mr.  MEEHAN.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman.  Thank  you  to  each  of 

our panelists for their very revealing testimony today. 

Let me ask both of you, 15 million reports in the course of a year, 
and  yet  we  are  trying  to  communicate  with  the  private  sector  si-
multaneously,  particularly  those  with  these  control  systems.  How 
do you triage to know what to communicate down the line and say 
this is something we ought to be reaching out to without becoming 
a point in time where you are—what is the old adage—crying wolf 
and they don’t know when to really be alerted? 

Mr.  REITINGER.  Sir,  I  would  say  you  have  to  do  a  couple  of 
things.  One,  you  broadly  have  to  find  the  broader  points  of  influ-
ence. In a time that we all have those scarce resources, what is the 

28 

most effective way to institute protections to get the private sector 
not only to understand the threat, but implement the threat? So we 
focus very much on that. 

You  try  to  have  broad  campaigns.  So  one  of  the  things  that  we 
did  this  year  for  the  first  time  as  a  response  to  the  President’s 
Cyberspace Policy Review, instead of just having an annual Cyber-
security  Security  Awareness  Month,  we  have  now  got  an  annual 
campaign, the ‘‘Stop. Think. Connect.’’ Campaign, which we are ad-
vocating for. It was developed—not by DHS, but actually by a part-
nership. That is something a partnership can do; it is people in the 
private  sector  and  the  public  sector  working  together  to  come  up 
with a message that we can all work together to implement, some-
thing fairly actionable. 

The  last  thing  is  that  you  do  have  to  make  choices,  you  do  have 
to triage. That is something we do generally in the space. We have 
5.4  million  events.  You  can’t  look  in  detail  at  every  one  of  them. 
You  have  to  figure  out  fairly  rapidly,  look  for  indicators  for  what 
are the most severe? You try to expand our capabilities. 

One  of  the  things  we  have  done  in  DHS  is  established  fly-away 
teams.  So  we  have  a  team  of  people  that  we  can  deploy  if  there  is 
a significant incident in at a private sector company and they need 
our assistance. 

In some sense it is because of the act, in some sense it is because 
of  a  prioritization,  that  team  is  typically  deployed  for  control  sys-
tems-type incidents because that is one of the things that we worry 
about  significantly.  So  there  are  a  lot  of  processes  that  one  has  to 
go  through  to  try  to  figure  out  where  you  are  most  effectively  ap-
plying resources to the effect you need. 

Mr. MEEHAN. Do you agree with that sort of assessment? 
Mr. WILSHUSEN. Yes, I would. 
Mr. MEEHAN. The thing that really strikes me again is the inter-
operability.  We  keep  talking  about  these  control  systems  and  the 
capacity  to  be  able  to  impact  entire  areas  which  are  inter-
dependent.  How  can  we  create  the  kind  of  requirement,  so  to 
speak, from the private sector to collaborate with you to be able to, 
as  we  say,  meet  some  kind  of  National  policy  standards  or  objec-
tives  so  that  we  are  working  together?  We  have  effectively  inde-
pendent agencies that have oversight over critical pieces of this in-
frastructure which are at risk. 

Mr. REITINGER. So, sir—I feel like I keep jumping ahead of Greg. 

Do you want to go first or I will? 

I  would  say  there  are  a  number  of  things  we  need  to  do.  We  at 
DHS are focused on executing within our existing authorities to ac-
complish that mission. There are a number of things we can do. We 
talked a lot about awareness, so raising awareness among the com-
panies  is  a  key  part  of  this.  As  Greg  has  indicated,  sharing  classi-
fied and unclassified threat information so that they are really sen-
sitized to what the issues are. 

Second,  we  can  work  on  things  like  helping  develop  standards 
and  working  with  the  private  sector  to  make  sure  that  they  have 
available solutions so that there is a known path to better security. 
Mr. MEEHAN. My time will run out, but are there minimal stand-
ards  right  now  that  we  have  in  the  industry  that  we  can  expect 
people to abide by so that at least there is some kind of a baseline 

29 

that we can expect collaboration that they will address within their 
own institution so that they are capable of communicating with you 
about these issues? 

Mr. REITINGER. So there are many standards, sir, of differing de-
grees  or  prescriptiveness,  if  you  will,  and  effectiveness.  One  of  the 
things  that  I  don’t  think  we  have  right  now  is  what  one  might 
think  of  as  a  baseline  ability  to  say  across  all  of  the  critical  infra-
structures we are meeting the standard that we need. So one of the 
things  that  we  are  doing  is  working  with  not  only  other  agencies 
within the Federal Government so that they are aware of what the 
requirements  are,  but  we  have,  in  one  case,  DHS  has  specific  au-
thority,  and  that  is  for  the  chemical  facilities  sector,  or  the  chem-
ical sector where we have put in a risk-based performance standard 
into  the  existing  CFATS  regime  related  to  cybersecurity.  We  will 
be  continuing  to  look  at  that  going  forward  to  make  sure  that  it 
meets National requirements. 

Mr.  WILSHUSEN.  If  I  may  add,  we  have  an  on-going  engagement 
right  now  looking  at  what  standards  are  in  effect  at  various  dif-
ferent  critical  infrastructure  sectors  and  to  assess,  to  the  extent 
that  those  standards  exist,  whether  they  are  voluntary;  and  how 
those  sectors  either  enforce  or  assure  that  their  members  actually 
implement  those  standards.  We  expect  to  be  reporting  out  on  that 
later this year. 

Mr. MEEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr.  LUNGREN.  I  will  just  tell  the  gentleman  that  we  will  shortly 
schedule  a  markup  on  the  CFATS  bill  so  that  we  will  have  that 
issue going forward. 

I  understand  Mr.  Keating  has  no  questions  at  this  time,  so  Mr. 

McCaul is recognized for 5 minutes. 

Mr.  MCCAUL.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman.  Phil,  it  is  good  to  see 
you again. Thank you for your hard work on the CSIS Commission. 
It is a great report, outstanding. 

I  mean,  the  threats  are  real,  we  all  know  what  they  are—the 
power  grids,  financial  sectors.  You  know,  when  I  was  Ranking 
Member  of  this  subcommittee  two  Congresses  ago,  we  held  hear-
ings and talked about what is the coordination between DHS? DHS 
has a primary mission to defend. Are they talking to DOD or NSA 
that  has  the  offensive  capability,  not  that  one  is  charged  with  de-
fensive, are those coordinating as well? 

I  will  say,  I  think,  DHS  has  come  a  long  way  since  those  hear-
ings, and that is very good news. I noticed, Phil, in your testimony 
you talked about an MOU that has been signed between DHS and 
the  DOD,  and  I  was  very  glad  to  see  that.  Can  you  explain  how 
that  is  working?  Also,  do  you  anticipate  doing  something  similar 
with NSA? 

Mr. REITINGER. Absolutely, sir. So I talked a little bit about that 
before.  We  signed,  at  the  Secretarial  level,  an  MOA,  a  memo-
randum of agreement—sorry, I fall back into acronyms too much— 
between the Department of Defense and the Department Homeland 
Security.  There  are  two  points  of  contact  on  that;  one  is  me,  and 
the  other  is  Dr.  Jim  Miller,  who  is  the  Principal  Under  Secretary 
of Defense for Policy at DOD. Under that agreement, DHS, so that 
we  can  stay  fully  synched  with  our  partners  in  the  Department  of 
Defense, has and is deploying a team of people to Fort Meade that 

30 

will  be  led  by  a  DHS  senior,  who  is  currently  Rear  Admiral  Mike 
Brown,  who  has  been  in  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  on 
detail from DOD for a number of years. 

He will have a team of people that will comprise first a joint co-
ordination element to do joint planning at DOD, make sure we can 
stay  operationally  synched,  a  group  of  people  who  are  going  to 
work with NSA on its technology, and another group of people who 
will  be  embedded  in  the  NTOC  at  NSA  so  that  we  have  full  assay 
of the NSA’s knowledge of the threat. 

NSA and Cyber Command are both deploying teams of people to 
our  Cyber  Operation  Center  to  support  our  domestic  cyber  oper-
ations.  So  there  will  be  a  cryptologic  support  group  from  NSA  and 
a  cyber  support  element—I  am  more  comfortable  with  CSG  and 
CSE,  but  those  are  what  they  are  called—from  Cyber  Command 
that  will  directly  support  us.  We  are  in  the  initial  stages  of  devel-
oping  these  capabilities,  but  it  is  already  working  very  well.  I 
would  also  say  that  those  are  not  the  only  means  that  we  have  to 
coordinate. So we literally hold a weekly SVTC, a secure video tele-
conference, with our partners in DOD to make sure we are staying 
coordinated.  We  work  with  them  at  deputies  committee  meetings 
and  lots  of  other  administrative  policy  and  other  processes.  So  we 
have  come  a  long  way  between  these  two  departments  in  our  abil-
ity to support each other and our respective mission spaces. 

Mr. MCCAUL. That is certainly good news, and I do want to com-
mend  you  for  that.  Again,  from  two  Congresses  ago,  that  is  great 
progress,  and  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that.  They  have  the  assets, 
the  expertise,  and  the  capabilities,  so  it  makes  no  sense  for  them 
not to work with you and share that. 

Private  sector  sharing  threat  information,  it  is  always  difficult 
for  the  private  sector  to  share  that  with  the  Federal  Government. 
The incentives are still lacking, I think, to some extent. They have 
a duty to their shareholders, they don’t want to report this kind of 
stuff. How do you incentivize them to do that? Would an exception 
to  FOIA  be  helpful  in  terms  of  that  threat  information  not  being 
subjected to a FOIA request? 

Mr.  REITINGER.  With  regard  to  at  least  some  information  sub-
mitted under the Protected Critical Information Infrastructure pro-
gram,  the  PCII  program,  there  is  a  FOIA  exception.  The  issue  I 
think  is  a  little  broader,  and  that  is  that  there  remains  a  lack  of 
clarity  about  the  costs  and  risks  of  sharing  information  from  the 
private  sector  to  the  Government.  So  sometimes  one  has  the  prob-
lem  that  when  the  private  sector  and  Government  want  to  talk— 
I think generally if something is happening, the private sector will 
lean  forward  to  figure  out  a  way  to  share  information,  as  will  the 
Government.  Because  when  you  get  operators  talking  with  opera-
tors, they have a problem to solve. If it is more on-going, the prob-
lem  is,  nowadays,  if  you  get  together  and  you  want  to  work  to-
gether,  you  want  to  share  information,  not  just  to  share  informa-
tion  to  solve  a  particular  problem,  sometimes  the  first  thing  you 
have  to  do  is  call  the  lawyers  into  the  room.  You  and  I,  sir,  are 
both lawyers, we love lawyers, but—— 

Mr. MCCAUL. I wouldn’t necessarily say that. 
Mr. REITINGER. So we have some internal processes going now to 
try  and  generate  some  clarity  with  the  private  sector  about  what 

31 

the  rules  are  so  that  you  can  have  a  more  rapid  and  effective  con-
versation. 

Mr. MCCAUL. Last, if I could indulge the Chair, the National Pol-
icy for Cyberspace—it was mentioned earlier—sir, the last one was 
developed in 2003, I think one of the recommendations we had with 
the  Commission  was  to  develop  a  National  policy.  That  is  within 
the  jurisdiction  and  authority  of  the  White  House.  Can  you  dem-
onstrate why that is so important and so critical? 

Mr. REITINGER. Well, I think having a National policy is critical. 
I  would  personally  favor,  while  I  think  we  knew  new  ways  to  do 
things,  focusing  very  heavily  on  implementation.  We  at  DHS  are 
working right now on the strategy which will underlie the cyberse-
curity part of the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review that the 
Ranking  Member  brought  up.  So  for  us  this  is  mission  four  or  cy-
bersecurity across the Homeland Security enterprise. We are work-
ing  now  across  Government  and  with  the  private  sector  to  develop 
that strategy that will roll out to the broader National strategy. 

Mr. MCCAUL. Thank you so much. 
Mr.  LUNGREN.  I  want  to  thank  our  panelists  for  not  only  your 
oral  testimony  here  today  but  your  written  testimony.  You  have 
helped us considerably. 

Mr.  Reitinger,  and  also  in  classified  briefings,  I  just  want  to  tell 
you that members of this panel very much appreciated your partici-
pation  and  the  participation  of  others,  and  that  has  helped  us  a 
great deal. 

I  will  be  calling  on  both  of  you  in  the  future  to  help  us  a  little 
bit  more  as  we  go  forward  on  an  issue  that  will  not  go  away  and 
only  needs  greater  clarity  and  greater  visibility.  So  we  thank  both 
of you. 

Now, we would move to our second panel, and I know it will take 

a little while for the three of them to get there. 

We  are  very  pleased  to  have  our  second  panel.  We  have  out-
standing  panelists  in  both  panels,  and  we  very  much  appreciate 
your time and your effort and the knowledge that you are relaying 
to us here today. 

Dr. Phyllis Schneck is the vice president and chief technical offi-
cer of Global Public Sector for McAfee. She also serves as a volun-
teer  as  chairman  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  National  Cyber- 
Forensics  &  Training  Alliance,  which  is  an  important  partnership 
between  Government,  law  enforcement,  and  the  private  sector  for 
information  analytics  and  has  been  used  to  prosecute  over  150 
cyber criminals worldwide. 

Earlier  Dr.  Schneck  worked  as  vice  president  of  Threat  Intel-
ligence  at  McAfee  and  was  responsible  for  the  design  and  applica-
tion  of  McAfee’s  internet  reputation  intelligence.  She  has  Ph.D.  in 
computer  science  from  Georgia  Tech  where  she  pioneered  the  field 
of information security and security-based higher-performance com-
puting. 

Thank you for being here. 
Dr. James Lewis is a senior fellow and program director at CSIS 
where  he  writes  on  technology,  National  security,  and  the  inter-
national economy. 

Before  joining  CSIS,  he  worked  in  the  Federal  Government  as  a 
Foreign  Service  officer  and  as  a  member  of  the  Senior  Executive 

32 

Service.  Most  recently  he  was  the  project  director  of  CSIS’s  Com-
mission on Cyber Security for the 44th Presidency. That report has 
been  downloaded,  I  understand,  more  than  40,000  times,  so  no  se-
crets  there.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  from  the  University  of  Chicago 
in 1984. 

Mischel Kwon is an IT executive with more than 29 years of ex-
perience  ranging  from  application,  design,  and  development  to 
building organizational and National level computer emergency in-
stant  response  and  readiness  teams.  She  is  most  recently  the  vice 
president of Public Sector Security for RSA, the security division of 
the EMC Corporation, and prior to that, she was the director of the 
United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team,  US–CERT, 
at DHS. 

We  welcome  all  of  our  witnesses.  We  are  pleased  that  you  are 
able to share your perspective with us. As I said, your written tes-
timony will be made part of the record. We would like to recognize 
each  of  you  in  order  for  5  minutes,  and  I  know  that  is  a  short  pe-
riod of time, but we will try and stay with that as much as possible 
and then ask you questions. 

So, first of all, Dr. Schneck. 
STATEMENTS OF PHYLLIS SCHNECK, VICE PRESIDENT AND 

CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER, MC AFEE INC. 

Ms. SCHNECK. Good morning. 
Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke,  and  other  distin-
guished  Members  of  the  subcommittee,  thank  you  for  requesting 
McAfee’s  views  on  cyber  threat  to  critical  infrastructure  and  the 
American economy. It is an honor and a pleasure to be part of the 
process and to be here today. 

Your  committee  is  playing  a  vital  role  in  helping  to  define  the 
contours  of  cybersecurity  debate,  and  your  aim  to  write  thoughtful 
and incentives-based legislation must be commended. 

As  you  mentioned,  I  focused  my  entire  career  on  cybersecurity, 
looking  at  both  the  technology  and  the  applications  and  certainly 
the  trust  engaged  in  public-private  partnership  and  the  need  for 
more information sharing. 

McAfee  is  the  largest  dedicated  cybersecurity  company  in  the 
world,  and  we  are  also  a  wholly-owned  subsidy  of  the  Intel  Cor-
poration.  We  protect  the  cyber  spectrum,  from  the  biggest  com-
puters and the big cloud computing, as we all refer, to the smallest 
components, even down to our cell phones or airplane avionics sys-
tems and our cars and certainly now to the chip. 

My testimony will focus on the following key areas: The evolution 
of  the  cyber  threat  landscape;  McAfee’s  Global  Threat  Intelligence 
Solution;  and  the  paradigm  change  that  we  need  to  make  in  order 
to protect our cyber infrastructures and thus our global critical in-
frastructures; two major cyber security events, advanced persistent 
threats  that  we  have  seen,  these  are  just  two  of  many,  many,  just 
two  that  have  been  vocalized;  and  certainly  some  policy  rec-
ommendations  to  improve  public-private  sector  information  shar-
ing. 

Our adversary is strong. Our adversary is smart. They act faster 
than  we  do.  They  have  full  funding,  in  many  cases,  from  govern-
ments,  from  nation  states.  They  have  malicious  intent,  and  they 

33 

don’t have the intellectual property barriers that we do. They don’t 
have  the  legal  barriers  that  we  do  to  execute.  They  are  criminals; 
there is nothing to lose. 

So  when  you  look  at  the  landscape  from  20  years  ago  and  you 
look at ‘‘antivirus,’’ all of the adversary’s ability over the past 2 dec-
ades,  all  of  the  damage  we  have  talked  about  this  morning,  has 
been enabled by malicious code, the ability of an adversary to exe-
cute their will somewhere else, and whether it causes, as in the old 
days,  just  something  to  prove  that  somebody  can  do  something  all 
the  way  to  financial  organized  crime  with  a  financial  motivation, 
and  now,  as  we  are  seeing,  government-structured  or  nation-state 
attacks  that  look  for  destruction  and/or  the  taking  of  intellectual 
property. 

As  we  look  at  how  we  fight  that,  a  signature  will  not  beat  this 
adversary.  Signature  was  a  legacy  model.  We  should  know  about 
the  attack.  We  will  protect  everybody,  and  boom,  they  are  fine 
when they get it, sort of like a vaccination. 

That doesn’t work anymore. We need a full paradigm shift to re-
take  the  global  cybersecurity  picture  that  we  have  as  a  private  in-
dustry  and  Government  and  infuse  that  into  our  network  fabric, 
again  from  cloud  to  chip,  where  the  enemy’s  will  is  blocked  before 
it reaches a target. 

When  you  think  about  global  threat  intelligence  and  what  we 
mean by that, McAfee and other companies in the IT infrastructure 
and other infrastructures have the ability and have developed very 
sophisticated  information-gathering  capabilities  where  we  have  a 
weather  map,  a  cyber  weather  map  of  events  that  happen  all  over 
the  world,  an  understanding  of  traffic  volumes,  an  understanding 
of  what  machines  are  doing,  what  harm  and  to  where,  where  they 
are targeting, where malicious code that looks just like other mali-
cious code is being sent. 

We  have  to  react  in  two  ways:  We  have  to  react  first  and  fore-
most  to  beat  this  adversary  in  milliseconds.  The  one  thing  this 
enemy  can’t  do  is  understand  how  the  entire  system  works  and 
block it in real time, so the disease never reaches your body or your 
body  can  fight  the  disease  in  real  time  without  understanding  the 
name of the germ first. 

The  second  thing  we  have  to  do  is  better  enable  ourselves  to 
share  information  at  the  human  level.  While  that  is  not  real  time, 
it  helps  us  understand  the  motivation,  understand  future  targets 
and, first and foremost, protect ourselves. 

We looked at two major threats over the past couple of years and 
led  the  investigations  at  McAfee.  There  are  many  others  like  this, 
but  first  one  was  Operation  Aurora,  same  name  as  the  diesel  gen-
erator  explosion  at  INL;  however,  we  kept  the  name  for  this  one. 
That is the name the bad guys gave it. It is in the file path. 

This  was  the  most  sophisticated  event  we  have  ever  seen  tar-
geted  toward  the  private  sector.  They  usually  save  this  for  our 
friends  in  Government.  We  estimate  it  took  teams  of  people  many 
weeks  to  target  the  20  or  so  companies  they  looked  for,  the  infor-
mation  they  wanted  to  get,  and,  most  powerfully,  the  people  in 
those  companies  that  had  an  access  to  code  stores  of  that  size, 
meaning  the  people  that  tested  the  code,  the  people  that  have  to 
see all of it working together. 

34 

They  exfiltrated  or  took  the  copies  of  the  code  out  to  servers 
placed  in  different  countries,  and  they  are  using  that  likely  today. 
Many  attacks  exist  that  look  just  like  this  today.  They  lurk;  they 
are often called advance persistent threat. 

The other one we recently discovered and investigated was called 
Night  Dragon,  similar  set  up  but  less  sophisticated,  again  one  of 
many.  But  they  were  looking  specifically  at  architectural  plans  for 
pipelines  in  the  oil  and  gas  sector,  and  this  one  was  around  the 
world. 

Leading  to  the  policy  recommendations,  the  private  sector  needs 
some  stronger  protections  to  share  information  with  Government 
and law enforcement. It was said in the earlier panel, in the middle 
of  the  crisis,  the  operators  will  talk,  and  they  do.  But  we  need  to 
be better protected. 

We  and  other  companies  put  little  pieces  of  the  puzzle  together, 
and we get a very big picture, and we want to share that with our 
colleagues in Government and in law enforcement. 

We want to do that faster. We can’t. It creates in many cases ma-
terial  information  that  affects  shareholders,  companies’  bottom 
lines,  and  it  can  breach  trust.  We  need  much  stronger  protection, 
so  that  when  someone  in  law  enforcement,  as  they  did,  called  me 
up  and  says,  why  didn’t  I  have  this  yesterday  when  you  knew  it, 
my answer doesn’t have to be, because I could get fired. 

We have to beat this adversary, and we have to—we all of the— 
we have a lot of the information we need among the private sector 
to use the great collaborative organizations that DHS and the FBI 
and  others  have  created  for  us  with  the  private  sector.  Great  con-
struct exists. If we can put more information into those, we can use 
those constructs to their fullest potential. 

So,  in  conclusion,  I  do  want  to  thank  you  very  much  for  having 
us today, for being a part of the process. McAfee is very committed 
to  working  with  the  U.S.  Government  to  solve  the  cybersecurity 
challenges and to beat this adversary. 

[The statement of Ms. Schneck follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF PHYLLIS SCHNECK 

MARCH 16, 2011 

Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke,  and  other  distinguished  Members 
of  the  subcommittee,  thank  you  for  requesting  McAfee’s  views  on  the  cyber  threat 
to  critical  infrastructure  and  the  American  economy.  Your  committee  is  playing  a 
vital  role  in  helping  to  define  the  contours  of  the  cyber  security  debate,  and  your 
aim to write thoughtful, incentives-based legislation must be commended. 

My  name  is  Phyllis  Schneck  and  I  have  dedicated  my  entire  professional  career 
to  the  security  and  infrastructure  protection  community.  My  technical  background 
is  in  high  performance  computing  and  cryptography.  In  addition  to  serving  as  Vice 
President and Chief Technology Officer, Global Public Sector, for McAfee, I serve as 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  National  Cyber  Forensics  and  Training 
Alliance, a partnership between Government, law enforcement, and the private sec-
tor  for  information  analytics  that  has  been  used  to  prosecute  over  150  cyber  crimi-
nals  world-wide.  Earlier,  I  worked  as  Vice  President  of  Threat  Intelligence  at 
McAfee  and  was  responsible  for  the  design  and  application  of  McAfee’sTM internet 
reputation intelligence. I have also served as a commissioner and working group co- 
chair on the public-private partnership for the CSIS Commission to Advise the 44th 
President on Cyber Security. 

Additionally,  I  served  for  8  years  as  chairman  of  the  National  Board  of  Directors 
of  the  FBI’s  InfraGardTM program  and  as  founding  president  of  InfraGard  Atlanta, 
growing  the  InfraGard  program  from  2,000  to  over  33,000  members  Nation-wide. 
Before joining McAfee, I was Vice President of Research Integration at Secure Com-

35 

puting.  I  hold  a  Ph.D.  in  Computer  Science  from  Georgia  Tech,  where  I  pioneered 
the field of information security and security-based high-performance computing. 

My testimony will focus on the following key areas: 
• The evolution of the cyber security threat landscape; 
• McAfee’s  Global  Threat  Intelligence  Solution  and  the  role  it  plays  in  enabling 
us  to  detect  and  remediate  a  wide  range  of  cyber  security  attacks  on  our  Na-
tion’s critical infrastructures; 
• Two  major  cyber  security  attacks,  Night  Dragon  and  Operation  Aurora,  and 
• Policy  recommendations  to  improve  public/private  sector  information  sharing 
that  is  essential  to  give  the  Government  the  capabilities  it  needs  to  respond  to 
the modern cybersecurity challenge. 

their implications for our homeland security; and 

First I would like to provide a little background on McAfee and some of our cyber-

security initiatives. 

MC AFEE’S ROLE IN CYBER SECURITY 

McAfee,  Inc.  protects  businesses,  consumers,  and  the  public  sector  from  cyber  at-
tacks, viruses, and a wide range of on-line security threats. Headquartered in Santa 
Clara, California, and Plano, Texas, McAfee is the world’s largest dedicated security 
technology company and is a proven force in combating the world’s toughest security 
challenges. McAfee is a wholly owned subsidiary of Intel Corporation. 

McAfee  delivers  proactive  and  proven  solutions,  services,  and  global  threat  intel-
ligence  that  help  secure  systems  and  networks  around  the  world,  allowing  users  to 
safely  connect  to  the  internet  and  browse  and  shop  the  web  more  securely.  Fueled 
by  an  award-winning  research  team,  McAfee  creates  innovative  products  that  em-
power  home  users,  businesses,  the  public  sector  and  service  providers  by  enabling 
them  to  prove  compliance  with  regulations,  protect  data,  prevent  disruptions,  iden-
tify vulnerabilities, and continuously monitor and improve their security. 

To help organizations take full advantage of their security infrastructure, McAfee 
launched  the  Security  Innovation  Alliance,  which  allows  organizations  to  benefit 
from  the  most  innovative  security  technologies  from  thousands  of  developers  who 
can now snap into our extensible management platform. Today, more than 100 tech-
nology partners—large and small businesses all committed to continuous innovation 
in security—have joined the alliance, with more to be announced soon. 

Two  years  ago,  McAfee  announced  an  initiative  to  fight  cybercrime,  a  wide-rang-
ing  initiative  aimed  at  closing  critical  gaps  in  assisting  victims  of  cybercrime  and 
preventing  new  events.  The  initiative  is  anchored  by  a  multi-point  plan  that  in-
cludes  calls  for  action  from  law  enforcement,  academia,  service  providers,  Govern-
ment,  the  security  industry  and  society  at  large  to  deliver  more  effective  investiga-
tions and prosecutions of cybercrime. 

Key elements of the plan include: 
• Education  and  Awareness.—McAfee  works  to  ensure  that  officials  around  the 
world  have  the  capacity  to  properly  fight  cybercrime,  while  helping  users  build 
‘‘street smarts’’ so that they don’t become easy victims. 
• Legal  Frameworks  and  Law  Enforcement.—McAfee  works  to  facilitate  inter-
national  collaboration  and  mutual  assistance  on  cybercrime  among  govern-
ments, industry, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). 
• Innovation.—McAfee  works  with  the  technology  industry  to  provide  technology 

solutions that stay one step ahead of the threats. 

McAfee is also supportive of the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyber-
space  (NSTIC),  working  with  our  partners  in  Government  and  industry  to  enable 
innovation  for  more  efficient  authentication  and  other  technologies  facilitating  a 
safer and more pleasant experience for electronic transactions. 

McAfee  is  committed  to  bringing  the  best  security  products  and  services  to  the 
market, partnering with leading IT vendors to ensure that customers have the abil-
ity to pick and choose the best solutions to close their security gaps, and giving con-
sumers  and  organizations  additional  resources  and  support  to  fight  cyber-crime 
ranging from organized financial crime to attacks that user the cyber infrastructure 
to  gain  access  to  intellectual  property  or  physical  infrastructure.  Likewise,  McAfee 
is  committed  to  taking  part  in  a  constructive  dialogue  with  policy  makers  on  cyber 
security initiatives, as we are pleased to do in this hearing today. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CYBER SECURITY THREAT LANDSCAPE 

For  purposes  of  this  testimony,  we  define  malware  as  a  set  of  instructions  for  a 
computer that causes the computer to behave in the will of the malware owner, such 
as providing unauthorized access to information or systems that control physical/ki-
netic  infrastructure.  Computers  execute  instructions.  Malware  puts  the  enemy’s  in-

36 

struction next on the list, and then the adversary controls all actions forward, some-
times  hiding  its  presence.  Malware  enters  a  machine  from  a  variety  of  ports,  typi-
cally  email,  web,  or  connection-level  access  that  is  unprotected  or  ill  advised  to 
admit  these  harmful  instructions.  Malware  can  also  be  referred  to  commonly  as  a 
‘‘virus.’’  As  in  biology,  when  a  machine  has  a  virus  it  is  compromised  and  its  func-
tions can cause harm. 

Historically,  security  software  relied  on  antivirus  ‘‘signatures’’  to  recognize  and 
block  malware.  Once  a  virus  was  detected,  a  signature  was  developed  by  the  secu-
rity software vendor and deployed in the form of a DAT file downloaded to the secu-
rity  software  on  customers’  computers.  That  software  would  then  be  in  a  position 
to recognize and block the malware—an approach much like a vaccine that requires 
advance  knowledge  of  the  threat.  However,  this  approach  is  not  sufficiently  fast  to 
fight  today’s  cyber  adversary,  and  that  is  why  McAfee  is  changing  the  paradigm  to 
proactive  defence  in  real-time:  to  make  our  networks  sufficiently  intelligent  to  pre-
vent  malicious  instructions  from  reaching  the  target—instead  of  requiring  that  the 
target be vaccinated with a signature. 

Today,  malware  developers  combine  web,  host,  and  network  vulnerabilities  with 
spam,  rootkits,  spyware,  worms,  and  other  means  of  attack.  Significantly,  malware 
is  often  distributed  with  micro-variations  (polymorphism),  or  the  ability  to  change 
quickly, with the effect that a signature developed when the malware is first discov-
ered  is  ineffective  against  the  multiple,  very  slightly  different  forms  of  the  same 
malware.  This  is  analogous  to  a  disease  mutating  so  that  the  vaccine  is  no  longer 
effective. Malware may be distributed indirectly by networks of computers that have 
been corrupted by a criminal (a ‘‘botnet’’). 

Criminals,  terrorists,  and  nation  states  often  invest  great  efforts  to  deploy  their 
software  in  hundreds  of  thousands  or  indeed  millions  of  computers  owned  by  inno-
cent third parties, in order then remotely to command their botnet to launch an at-
tack  on  a  particular  set  of  targets.  The  malicious  software  distributed  by  botnets 
will  often  actively  evolve  to  become  whatever  is  needed  by  its  controller  and  is  not 
limited  by  the  boundaries  of  antivirus  labels.  This  means  that  code  that  appears 
otherwise harmless in order to be let into the network can be told to spread rapidly. 
This  is  why  we  refer  to  this  type  of  code  as  a  worm.  It  means,  for  example,  that 
malware originally configured to generate spam messages can be instructed to steal 
banking information. Again, cyber actions rely on the execution of instructions, and 
a  compromised  machine  often  follows  the  adversary’s  instructions  to  reach  out  to  a 
server in another location for its next set of instructions, which can vary widely. 

By  leveraging  multiple  threat  vectors  and  ‘‘one-time  usage,’’  hackers  are  able  to 
extend  the  time  period  in  which  their  malware  remains  undetected  and  are  thus 
able  to  steal  the  money,  personal  data,  and  other  valuable  information  of  users 
throughout the United States and the world. In this way, what might be called clas-
sic  ‘‘viruses’’  have  been  blended  in  recent  years  with  other  types  of  malware  and 
techniques  used  by  malicious  hackers  intent  on  stealing  personal  data.  Hackers 
have  discovered  that  direct  external  attacks  are  unnecessary  and  risky.  It  is  now 
easier to engineer malicious software that is delivered to a system remotely through 
various means. 

Modern malware thus can no longer be classified by its perceived purpose or prop-
agation method, because those change in an instant. Some types of software can be 
engineered  to  gain  access  to  and  maintain  control  over  the  victim’s  machine.  Once 
the malware is on the system, it seeks to communicate with its controlling entity— 
the  criminal  actor.  Once  communication  is  established  over  the  internet,  any  com-
promised  machine  can  be  instructed  both  to  pass  over  any  data  of  value  to  the 
criminal  and  to  act  as  an  instrument  of  attack  against  other  computers  and  net-
works. 

MC AFEE GLOBAL THREAT INTELLIGENCE 

McAfee and other sophisticated cyber security providers have developed multi-vec-
tor,  real-time,  predictive  protection  against  these  more  sophisticated  attacks  on  in-
formation  systems.  McAfee’s  solution  is  known  as  Global  Threat  Intelligence,  or 
GTI.  Cybersecurity  solutions  based  on  this  GTI  approach  protect  the  customer’s 
computer by calculating the potential risk of a piece of content based on experience 
with the IP address from which it originates, the website, or other elements associ-
ated with the content in question. 

Thus cybersecurity providers offer solutions enabling the customer to stop content 
that  is  analyzed  as  having  a  risk  probability  score  that  in  the  customer’s  view  is 
‘‘too  risky’’  to  be  loaded  into  the  memory  of  the  customer’s  computer.  McAfee  GTI 
tracks  the  anomalous  behavior  and  proactively  adjusts  an  entity’s  reputation—its 
website, IP address, domain, file, network connection, and so forth—so that McAfee 

37 

products  can  block  the  threat  and  protect  customers.  Then  McAfee  GTI  looks  out 
across  its  broad  network  of  sensors  and  connects  the  dots  between  the  website  and 
associated malware, email messages, IP addresses, and other associations, adjusting 
the  reputation  of  each  related  entity  so  that  McAfee’s  security  products—from  end-
point  to  network  to  gateway—can  protect  users  from  cyber  threats  at  every  angle. 
McAfee GTI offers the most comprehensive threat intelligence in the market. With 
visibility across all threat vectors—file, web, message, and network—and a view into 
the  latest  vulnerabilities  across  the  IT  industry,  McAfee  correlates  real-world  data 
collected from millions of sensors around the globe and delivers real-time, and often 
predictive, protection via its security products. 

Our  cyber  enemies  are  smart  and  fast.  They  maintain  their  knowledge  of  net-
works and techniques by freely sharing information, enjoying a lack of legal or intel-
lectual property barriers that often block the defenders. The adversary is well-fund-
ed,  often  by  governments,  and  has  no  barrier  to  swift  execution.  This  is  why  our 
cyber infrastructures have become their play land. The ability to see a global cyber 
picture  and  to  have  situational  awareness  is  what  the  adversary  cannot  do.  This  is 
where  we  can  win—by  making  the  network  fabric  reject  malicious  instructions  in 
real-time,  at  the  speed  of  light,  before  they  can  hit  a  target.  This  is  how  we  can 
be faster than the adversary, and this is the paradigm shift from vaccines to a cyber 
immune system that enhances cross-sector cyber resiliency. 

Our Global Threat Intelligence service as well as a number of our other products 
and  services  helped  us  first  detect  and  then  remediate  two  important  global  cyber 
security attacks—Night Dragon and Operation Aurora. These attacks are significant 
because  they  were  managed  by  coordinated  and  organized  teams  that  succeeded  in 
extracting  billions  of  dollars  of  intellectual  property  from  leading  American  compa-
nies in the information technology, defense, and energy sectors—strategic industries 
vital to the country’s long-term economic success and National security. 

OPERATION AURORA 

On  January  14,  2010  McAfee  Labs  identified  a  zero-day  (previously  publicly  un-
known) vulnerability in Microsoft Internet Explorer that was used as an entry point 
for  Operation  Aurora  to  exploit  Google  and  at  least  20  other  companies.  Microsoft 
has since issued a security bulletin and patch. 

Operation Aurora was a coordinated attack that included a piece of computer code 
that  exploits  the  Microsoft  Internet  Explorer  vulnerability  to  gain  access  to  com-
puter  systems.  This  exploit  is  then  extended  to  download  and  activate  malware 
within  the  systems.  The  attack,  which  was  initiated  surreptitiously  when  targeted 
users accessed a malicious web page (likely because they believed it to be reputable), 
ultimately  connected  those  computer  systems  to  a  remote  server.  That  connection 
was  used  to  steal  company  intellectual  property  and,  according  to  Google,  addition-
ally gain access to user accounts. 

We  also  discovered  that  intruders  used  a  social  engineering  message,  known  as 
spear-phishing,  to  target  employees  with  a  high  level  of  access  in  these  companies 
(either software developers, quality assurance engineers, or domain administrators). 
The  message  would  come  from  a  previous  acquaintance  of  the  targeted  user  and 
would  ask  them  to  click  on  a  web  link  pointing  to  a  web  server  in  Taiwan.  As  we 
uncovered  and  then  reported  to  Microsoft,  the  web  link  hosted  an  obfuscated  and 
encoded exploit for a zero-day vulnerability in Internet Explorer. 

If  a  user  had  clicked  on  a  link  with  Internet  Explorer  version  6,  their  machine 
would  be  automatically  compromised  and  malicious  code  would  be  downloaded  and 
executed  stealthily  on  the  computer.  The  Trojan  would  establish  an  evasive  back-
door command and control channel to the same server in Taiwan through which live 
attackers  would  jump  onto  the  system  and  proceed  to  escalate  their  privileges  on 
the  local  machine  as  well  as  other  servers  within  the  network.  As  they  moved  rap-
idly through the network, they would identify and compromise repositories of intel-
lectual property and exfiltrated data of interest out of the company. In many cases, 
this  data  included  source  code—the  crown  jewels  of  these  information  technology 
companies—which  then  could  be  used  by  attackers  to  discover  new  vulnerabilities 
in  software  that  is  used  by  the  critical  infrastructure  industry,  Government  agen-
cies, and many other organizations across the globe. 

McAfee  is  continuing  to  work  with  multiple  organizations  that  were  impacted  by 
this attack, as well as with various Government agencies, to address this major sup-
ply chain attack in the U.S. commercial sector. 

38 

NIGHT DRAGON 

McAfee has identified a string of attacks designed to steal sensitive data from tar-
geted  organizations.  Unlike  opportunistic  attacks,  the  perpetrators  appear  to  be 
highly organized, premeditative, and motivated in their pursuits. 

Night  Dragon  attacks  are  similar  to  Operation  Aurora  and  other  advanced  per-
sistent  threats,  or  APTs,  in  that  they  employ  a  combination  of  social  engineering 
and  well-coordinated,  targeted  cyber  attacks  using  remote  control  software  and 
other malware. McAfee has linked these attacks to intrusions starting in November 
2009, and there is circumstantial evidence suggesting they may have begun as early 
as  2007.  Currently,  new  Night  Dragon  victims  are  being  identified  almost  weekly. 
Night Dragon attacks leverage coordinated, covert, and targeted cyber attacks in-
volving social engineering, spear-phishing, vulnerability exploits in the Windows op-
erating  system,  Active  Directory  compromises,  and  remote  administration  tools,  or 
RATs. The attack sequence is as follows: 
• Public-facing  web  servers  are  compromised  via  SQL  injection;  malware  and 
• The compromised web servers are used to stage attacks on internal targets. 
• Spear-phishing  email  attacks  on  mobile,  VPN-connected  workers  are  used  to 
• Attackers  use  password-stealing  tools  to  access  other  systems—installing  RATs 
• Systems  belonging  to  executives  are  targeted  for  emails  and  files,  which  are 

gain additional internal access. 

and malware as they go. 

RATs are installed. 

captured and extracted by the attackers. 

McAfee  has  evidence  of  Night  Dragon  malware  infections  in  the  Americas,  Eu-
rope,  and  Asia.  McAfee  has  also  identified  tactics,  techniques,  and  procedures 
(TTPs)  utilized  during  these  continuing  attacks  that  point  to  individuals  in  China 
as  the  primary  source.  The  Night  Dragon  attackers  are  currently  targeting  global 
oil,  energy,  and  petrochemical  companies  with  the  apparent  intent  of  stealing  sen-
sitive  information  such  as  operational  details,  exploration  research,  and  financial 
data  related  to  new  oil  and  gas  field  bid  negotiations.  As  we  saw  with  the 
WikiLeaks  document  disclosures  brought  about  by  a  malicious  insider,  sensitive 
data  theft  can  be  highly  damaging  beyond  regulatory  penalties  and  lost  revenue. 
And  unlike  Stuxnet,  the  tools  and  techniques  behind  Night  Dragon  are  not  specific 
to  critical  infrastructure  and  can  be  used  to  launch  attacks  against  any  industry. 

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 

Officials  have  made  tremendous  progress  in  the  creation  of  information-sharing 
constructs  comprising  multiple  agencies  and  the  private  sector.  With  good  informa-
tion,  the  collaboration  enabled  by  these  constructs  will  help  us  to  achieve  what  the 
enemy  already  has:  Speed  and  alacrity  of  information  sharing  and  acting  on  it  for 
high impact. 

In many cases, private sector companies can solve a cybersecurity puzzle by evalu-
ating  many  disparate  clues.  Private  companies  need  protected  ways  to  share  their 
big-picture  research  findings  with  the  Government  without  loss  of  trust  or  creation 
of material events for stockholders, so that the most significant cybersecurity infor-
mation  is  expeditiously  actionable.  This  is  the  human  component  of  what  Global 
Threat  Intelligence  does  at  machine  speed.  We  need  both  in  order  to  defeat  cyber 
adversaries, whose aim is to harm our way of life. 

Existing public/private partnerships should ensure that senior corporate and Gov-
ernment officials are positioned to share vital information and best practices. Among 
other  things,  this  means  access  to  sensitive  (or  classified)  information  and  a  secure 
mechanism for sharing it. 

Broad-based  situational  awareness  is  vital  to  securing  our  global  cyber  systems 
and  ensuring  our  National  security.  Policies  that  enable  companies  and  govern-
ments  to  work  together,  using  global  threat  intelligence  (e.g.,  combining  cyber,  en-
ergy, finance, and other data) to enhance correlation and predictive capabilities, are 
critical to real-time responsiveness within the network switching/routing fabric. The 
Lieberman-Collins-Carper  bill  supports  such  information  sharing  by  requiring  the 
Government  to  share  information,  including  threat  analysis  and  warning  informa-
tion, with owners and operators regarding risks to their networks. Legislation devel-
oped in the House of Representatives would benefit from similar language. 

The cybersecurity challenge faced by our country is a serious matter that requires 
an  evolution  in  the  way  in  which  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  collaborate. 
Each sector has its own set of core capabilities; only the Government can implement 

CONCLUSION 

39 

the  complex  set  of  organizational  and  policy  responses  necessary  to  counter  the 
growing  cybersecurity  threat.  Leading  information  technology  companies  and  their 
customers are uniquely positioned to act as early warning systems that can identify 
and help address cybersecurity attacks as a real-time cyber immune system. 

With  the  right  industry-Government  collaboration,  networks  of  the  future  can 
comprise  intelligence  and  create  resiliency  by  instantly  rejecting  harmful  code  in 
milliseconds as opposed to the hours it traditionally takes to make a signature, just 
as  our  bodies  reject  viruses  even  though  we  may  not  know  the  name  of  the  par-
ticular  disease.  Information  technology  companies  focused  on  cybersecurity  in  par-
ticular have the resources and the economic incentives to continue to invent and de-
velop  the  technologies  and  solutions  needed  to  stay  ahead  of  sophisticated  cyber 
attackers.  In  the  best  American  tradition  of  collaboration,  the  public  and  private 
sectors  have  made  important  strides  to  address  the  cybersecurity  challenge  and  to 
enhance  trusted  working  relationships.  As  we  work  together  to  further  evolve  our 
collaboration models, we can succeed in protecting our homeland from the threat of 
cyber attacks. 

Thank you for asking me to take part in this hearing on behalf of McAfee. I would 

be happy to answer your questions. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Thank you very much. 
Mr. Lewis. 

STATEMENT OF JAMES A. LEWIS, DIRECTOR AND SENIOR FEL-
LOW,  TECHNOLOGY  AND  PUBLIC  POLICY  PROGRAM,  CEN-
TER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES 
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to 
Ranking  Member  Clarke  and,  of  course,  hello  to  Congressman 
McCaul,  who  was  invaluable  as  the  cochair  in  leading  the  CSIS 
commission. So one of the reasons it has been downloaded so many 
times is due to him. 

This  will  be  a  good  year  for  cyber  security  because  of  the  work 
of  this  committee  and  others.  With  luck,  I  think  in  this  Congress, 
we will see real progress in making our Nation more secure. 

But  this  outcome  is  not  guaranteed.  We  have  been  trying  for 

years to secure our networks, and we have not succeeded, right. 

So  you  have  heard  the  litany  of  problems,  major  corporations, 
banks,  Government  agencies;  they  have  all  been  victims.  We  have 
lost  sensitive  military  information,  oil  exploration  data,  valuable 
commercial technologies and millions of dollars from banks. 

The  interesting  thing  about  these  crimes  is  that  they  are  risk- 
free.  No  one  has  ever  been  punished  for  them,  and  so,  of  course, 
when  you  have  a  crime  and  no  one  gets  punished,  they  are  just 
going to do it again, right. 

What  we  are  doing  now  to  secure  cyberspace  is  not  working. 
There  has  been  real  progress  at  some  agencies,  like  DHS,  but  we 
need  to  rethink  our  approach.  To  put  this  in  perspective,  think 
about the threats we face. First, a few advanced militaries have the 
ability  to  use  cyber  attacks  to  disrupt  critical  infrastructure  and 
service.  They  have  done  the  reconnaissance  on  critical  infrastruc-
ture. They have planned how to do this. 

They  will  not  launch  a  cyber  attack  because  they  are  not  going 
to  start  a  war  for  no  reason  with  the  United  States;  they  are  de-
terred  by  our  military.  But  if  they  ever  did  attack  us,  we  are  pre-
pared to defend ourselves. 

Terrorists do not yet have the capability to launch cyber attacks, 
but  groups  like  al-Qaeda  in  the  Arabian  Peninsula  are  seeking  to 
acquire  these  capabilities.  Perhaps  more  worrisome,  Iran  and 
North  Korea  are  developing  cyber  attack  capabilities.  When  these 

40 

terrorist and rogue states can launch a cyber attack, they, too, will 
find that we are unprepared. 

Cyber  espionage  and  cyber  crime  are  daily  occurrences  in  the 
United  States,  and  they  do  long-term  damage  to  our  economy  and 
to our global competitiveness. They also help set the stage for cyber 
attack.  Some  of  our  opponents  use  cyber  criminals  as  mercenaries, 
as  proxy  forces.  Our  most  advanced  opponents  in  cyber  crime  and 
cyber  espionage  can  overpower  even  the  most  technologically  so-
phisticated  U.S.  company,  and  we  have  seen  many  examples  of 
that. 

Agencies  have  made  strenuous  efforts,  but  we  are  not  yet  pre-
pared to defend ourselves. There are three key issues that I call to 
the  committee’s  attention,  how  to  give  Government  a  leading  role 
in  cybersecurity,  how  to  ensure  cybersecurity  at  critical  infrastruc-
ture, something we cannot do now, and how to create international 
rules  to  reduce  the  risk  of  cyber  crime  and  the  risk  of  cyber  war? 
These  are  all  hard  problems,  but  they  are  not  impossible.  CSIS’ 
Cyber-Security  Commission,  which  Congressman  McCaul  helped 
lead,  has  released  two  reports  with  recommendations.  Our  funda-
mental point, and this gets to the question about the 2003 National 
strategy,  our  fundamental  point  is  that  the  old  approach  doesn’t 
work, and we need a new strategy that uses all the tools of Amer-
ican power, military, law enforcement, Homeland Security, partner-
ship with the private sector. If we can come up with this new com-
bined  strategy,  we  will  be  able  to  do  something  effective  to  protect 
ourselves,  but  we  are  not  there  yet  by  any  stretch  of  the  imagina-
tion. 

With this, I thank the committee and look forward to your ques-

tions. 

[The statement of Mr. Lewis follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF JAMES A. LEWIS 

MARCH 16, 2010 

Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke, and Members of the committee. Let 
me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  this  opportunity  to  testify  on  this  important  subject. 
Cybersecurity  first  came  to  the  attention  of  the  public  in  the  mid-1990s,  some  15 
years  ago.  The  first  major  policy  for  cybersecurity,  Presidential  Decision  Directive 
63, appeared in 1998. 

In  the  intervening  years,  there  has  been  much  discussion  and  a  few  new  ideas. 
We  can  get  a  sense  of  the  state  of  cybersecurity  and  whether  there  has  been  any 
progress  the  United  States  by  reviewing  major  cybersecurity  events  that  have  oc-
curred since the start of 2010. 
• January  2010.—Google  announced  that  an  attack  had  penetrated  its  networks, 
along  with  the  networks  of  more  than  80  other  U.S.  high-tech  companies.  The 
goal  of  the  penetrations,  which  Google  ascribed  to  China,  were  to  collect  tech-
nology, gain access to activist Gmail accounts and to Google’s password manage-
ment system. 
• January 2010.—Intel Corporation also disclosed that it has experienced a harm-
• January  2010.—Global  financial  services  firm  Morgan  Stanley  experienced  a 
‘‘very  sensitive’’  break-in  to  its  network  by  the  same  hackers  who  attacked 
Google, according to leaked e-mails. 
• March  2010.—NATO  and  the  European  Union  warned  that  the  number  of  suc-
cessful  cyber  attacks  against  their  networks  have  increased  significantly  over 
the past 12 months. 
• March 2010.—Australian authorities say there were more than 200 attempts to 
hack into the networks of the legal defense team for executives from Australian 
energy company Rio Tinto, to gain inside information on the trial defense strat-
egy. 

ful cyber attack at the same time. 

41 

• April  2010.—Hackers  break  into  classified  systems  at  the  Indian  Defence  Min-
istry  and  Indian  embassies  around  the  world,  gaining  access  to  Indian  defense 
and armament planning. 
• May  2010.—A  leaked  memo  from  the  Canadian  Security  and  Intelligence  Serv-
ice  (CSIS)  says,  ‘‘Compromises  of  computer  and  combinations  networks  of  the 
Government  of  Canada,  Canadian  universities,  private  companies  and  indi-
vidual  customer  networks  have  increased  substantially . . . In  addition  to 
being  virtually  unattributable,  these  remotely  operated  attacks  offer  a  produc-
tive, secure, and low-risk means to conduct espionage.’’ 
• October  2010.—Stuxnet,  a  complex  piece  of  malware  designed  to  interfere  with 
Siemens  Industrial  Control  Systems  discovered  in  Iran,  Indonesia,  and  else-
where,  results  in  significant  physical  damage  to  the  Iranian  nuclear  program. 
• October  2010.—The  Wall  Street  Journal  reports  that  hackers  using  ‘‘Zeus’’ 
malware,  available  in  cybercrime  black  markets  for  about  $1,200,  were  able  to 
steal  over  $12  million  from  five  banks  in  the  United  States  and  United  King-
dom. 
• December 2010.—British Foreign Minister William Hague reported (in February 
2011)  attacks  by  a  foreign  power  on  the  U.K.  Foreign  Ministry,  a  defence  con-
tractor  and  ‘‘other  British  interests.’’  The  attack  succeeded  by  pretending  to 
come from the White House. 
• January  2011.—The  Canadian  government  reports  a  major  cyber  intrusion  in-
volving  the  Defence  Research  and  Development  Canada,  a  research  agency  for 
the Department of National Defence, the Department of Finance, and the Treas-
ury Board, Canada’s main economic agencies. The intrusions forced the Finance 
Department and the Treasury Board, to disconnect from the internet. 
• March  2011.—Hackers  penetrate  French  government  computer  networks  in 
• March  2011.—The  Republic  of  Korea  said  that  foreign  hackers  penetrated  its 
defense  networks  in  an  attempt  to  steal  information  on  the  U.S.-made  Global 
Hawk unmanned aircraft, provided to Korea as it considers whether to buy the 
UAV. 

search of sensitive information on upcoming G–20 meetings. 

Major corporations, financial firms, Government agencies, and allies have all been 
victims,  and  these  are  just  the  events  we  know  about.  There  are  of  course  many 
more incidents stretching back into the 1990s, that include the loss of tens of thou-
sands of pages of sensitive military information, market and exploration data worth 
millions  from  oil  companies,  the  loss  of  valuable  commercial  technologies,  and  hun-
dreds  of  millions  of  dollars  from  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Classified 
military networks have been penetrated by foreign intelligence agencies. Best of all, 
from  the  perpetrators’  perspective,  no  one  has  ever  been  punished  for  any  of  these 
actions. 

This is not a record of success. Whatever we are doing is not working. Since 1998, 
we  have  repeatedly  tried  a  combination  of  information  sharing,  market-based  ap-
proaches, public/private partnership and self-regulation in a vain effort to strength-
en  our  cyber  defenses.  However,  despite  this  dispiriting  record  of  opponent  success, 
I  feel  confident  in  predicting  that  this  year,  the  old,  failed  formulas  will  be  trotted 
out again this year. Many of the reports and essays we see emerging now will advo-
cate  tired  ideas  in  order  to  block  change  rather  than  increase  cybersecurity.  While 
individual  Government  agencies  have  made  strenuous  efforts  to  improve  our  cyber 
defenses, as a Nation, despite all the talk, we are still not serious about cybersecu-
rity. 

This  is  due  to  a  reluctance  to  make  the  changes  cybersecurity  requires.  People 
still  advocate  strategies  and  policies  that  appeared  more  than  a  decade  ago  and 
which have not worked. We have consistently underestimated the risks and damage 
from weak cybersecurity. Everyone is for better security, but there has always been 
some other objective that seemed more important. 

Cybersecurity  is  another  of  those  situations  in  American  history,  ranging  from 
Pearl Harbor to 9/11, where we knew there was risk and that we were unprepared, 
but  assumed  it  would  never  happen  because  America  is  too  powerful  or  too  big  to 
attack. 

Nothing has yet punctured this misplaced sense of invulnerability. America is still 
powerful,  and  it  is  easy  to  say  that  the  sky  is  not  falling  and  there  is  no  need  for 
haste. The effect of this over confidence is to make tolerable the slow erosion of our 
National  power  due  to  feeble  cybersecurity.  Some  call  it  the  ‘‘death  of  a  thousand 
cuts,’’  where  each  tiny  cut  goes  unnoticed  by  the  victim.  There  are  warning  signs 
that even a Nation as rich and as powerful as the United States is at risk. The chal-
lenges  to  our  financial  system  and  the  loss  of  manufacturing  and  innovative  capa-
bilities  are  subjects  for  another  hearing,  but  weak  cybersecurity  exacerbates  these 

problems.  Business  as  usual  means  long-term  decline  as  our  economic  and  techno-
logical leadership is damaged by cyber espionage. 

42 

There  are  also  two  sets  of  risk.  One  is  immediate  and  real.  Two  of  our  potential 
military  opponents  have  the  capability  to  launch  damaging  cyber  attacks  against 
America’s  critical  infrastructure.  The  Aurora  test  at  the  Idaho  National  Labs  and 
the  Stuxnet  worm  showed  that  cyber  attacks  can  do  physical  damage.  These  oppo-
nents  have  carried  out  network  reconnaissance  against  critical  infrastructure  to 
allow them to plan their attacks. The issue for this committee is that after 12 years 
of information sharing, public private partnership, and voluntary action, critical in-
frastructure in the United States is not ready for an attack. 

While  these  militaries  have  the  capability  to  launch  a  damaging  cyber  attack, 
they are unlikely to do so short of an armed conflict. They are deterred by the threat 
of  an  American  military  response.  Only  if  we  were  to  get  into  a  shooting  war  with 
them, over Taiwan or Estonia, could we expect to see cyber attacks. However, while 
we  can  deter  military  attack,  our  military  strength  does  not  deter  espionage  and 
crime  in  cyberspace.  Deterrence  not  a  solution  for  cybersecurity’s  most  pressing 
problems. 

Cyber terrorism is still a distant threat, but it is a threat that is increasing. Ter-
rorists  lack  the  capability  to  launch  cyber  attacks.  If  they  had  this  capability,  they 
would have already used it. Our original emphasis on ‘‘cyber terrorism’’ was wrong. 
The day a terrorist group gets cyber attack capabilities, they will use them. At that 
moment,  if  we  have  not  improved  our  cyber  defenses,  they  will  succeed  in  causing 
disruption and damage. It is concerning to note that a few terrorist groups have ex-
pressed  interest  in  acquiring  cyber  attack  capabilities—the  most  recent  was  al- 
Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). This group is worrisome. They are inven-
tive  in  using  the  internet  for  propaganda  and  organization,  and  they  have  said  one 
of  their  goals  is  to  disrupt  the  American  economy—this  was  the  alleged  motive  for 
their  effort  using  printer  cartridges  in  air  shipments.  We  have  some  number  of 
years—I hope—before AQAP or another group, or an irresponsible nation like North 
Korea  or  Iran,  acquires  cyber  attack  capabilities,  because  we  will  not  be  able  to 
deter them from attacking and our defenses are inadequate. 

If  there  is  one  conclusion  that  we  can  draw  from  the  long  list  of  cyber  incidents, 
it  is  that  we  are  not  prepared  to  defend  ourselves.  So  we  are  vulnerable,  but  the 
risk  of  attack  is  low  for  the  moment.  As  long  as  our  opponents  do  not  attack  us, 
we  are  safe.  This  is  not  an  ideal  strategy  for  a  superpower.  Our  current  approach 
to  cybersecurity  leaves  initiative  and  control  to  our  opponents.  It  also  is  ineffective 
in stopping the slow but steady damage to our economy and to our National security 
that comes from cyber espionage. 

Remedying  the  situation  will  take  a  concerted  effort,  but  we  are  far  from  con-
sensus on how to proceed. We will hear that public-private partnership is essential, 
because  the  private  sector  owns  85%  of  critical  infrastructure.  The  private  sector 
owns  100%  of  the  airlines  in  the  United  States  as  well,  but  no  one  uses  this  as  an 
excuse  to  say  we  do  not  need  an  air  force.  We  will  hear  that  the  internet  must  be 
protected  because  it  is  a  source  of  innovation.  Now,  in  other  fora,  it  is  common  to 
hear that the United States is lagging behind in innovation, so it is fair to ask just 
how much the internet has helped. Innovation is a complex process and focusing on 
the  internet  as  its  source  is  probably  wrong,  perhaps  a  last  left-over  form  the  dot- 
com  bubble.  But  the  notion  that  ability  to  better  protect  intellectual  property  and 
proprietary  business  information  will  somehow  hurt  innovation  is  bound  to  re-
appear.  We  will  hear  that  technology  moves  too  fast  for  regulation,  but  this  is  true 
only  if  you  try  to  write  prescriptive  regulations.  It  is  an  avoidable  mistake.  And 
there will be a call for incentives, as if paying for an inadequate defense will some-
how make it better. 

No  sector  has  a  greater  incentive  than  banks  to  protect  their  networks.  They  are 
a  constant  target.  Some  banks,  particularly  the  top  tier  banks,  have  sophisticated 
defenses. Despite this, they are hacked. This is not surprising considering the thou-
sand  of  probes  they  face  each  year,  but  even  with  all  the  incentives  in  the  world 
and  with  a  strong  focus  on  cybersecurity  that  is  matched  in  few  other  critical  sec-
tors, they cannot be secure. If the banks cannot protect themselves, why do we think 
other sectors will be able to do so? 

The business implications for spending on cybersecurity by private companies, es-
pecially  critical  infrastructure  companies,  are  straightforward.  Investing  in  in-
creased cybersecurity requires them to spend on nonproductive assets. They will not 
get  an  increased  return  on  investment  from  this  spending.  There  is  a  notion  that 
if  we  could  only  demonstrate  the  scope  of  the  losses,  companies  would  be 
incentivized to recalculate the business case for cybersecurity and spend more. This 
may not make sense for critical infrastructure. The bulk of the losses come from the 
theft  of  intellectual  property  from  commercial  research  and  manufacturing  compa-

43 

nies. Critical infrastructure companies are likely experience less loss of this kind of 
data. The risk they face is the potential for service disruption, but before the disrup-
tion occurs, the cost may be so low as to be unnoticeable. 

Additionally, it is likely that some industry sectors are more important than oth-
ers for cybersecurity. Opponents may consider the defense, high-tech, or energy sec-
tors  as  higher-value  targets  for  economic  espionage.  Electrical  and  telephone  grids 
may  be  high-value  targets  for  critical  infrastructure  attacks,  as  disrupting  them 
could have cascading effects through the economy. The financial sector may be par-
ticularly attractive as it is both a critical infrastructure—stop the flow of money and 
you trigger immense disruption—and attractive as a target for crime. There are in-
dications  that  the  financial  sector  and  the  electrical  grid  face  increasing  risk  be-
cause  of  heightened  opponent  interest  (whether  State  or  criminal)  in  these  sectors 
as targets. 

This  has  implications  for  a  National  resiliency  strategy.  Without  external  incen-
tives,  companies  will  be  unwilling  to  invest  in  redundant  infrastructure  to  provide 
resilience.  On  the  other  hand,  providing  incentives  without  also  being  able  to  en-
force  compliance  means  at  best,  we  will  get  a  very  uneven  level  of  implementation 
and  continued  vulnerability.  Incentives  only  make  sense  if  increased  authority  for 
the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  accompanies  them.  Incentives  by 
themselves are a give-away without benefit to security. 

Incentives  will  not  solve  the  problem  of  our  reliance  on  a  disaggregated,  point 
cyber defense, where each network or user is responsible for their own defense. This 
is  the  worst  possible  defense  against  a  skilled  opponent.  Every  company  is  on  its 
own, and they can be picked off one by one. Providing incentives without being able 
to  coordinate  our  cyber  defenses  and  ensure  a  common  level  of  performance  is  not 
an improvement. 

Voluntary action is also not enough. Is there a more sophisticated technology com-
pany  than  Google?  Google  has  unparalleled  skills  and  resources.  The  same  is  true 
for Intel, Adobe, Microsoft, and the many other companies that have allegedly been 
hacked.  Voluntary  action  by  even  the  most  sophisticated  tech  companies  is  inad-
equate.  The  reason  for  this  is  simple.  Pros  always  beat  amateurs.  We  are  asking 
corporations  to  take  on  the  most  powerful  military  and  intelligence  agencies  in  the 
world, agencies that do not observe our laws and that do not like us. It is no contest. 
It is like sending the company softball team against the Giants or the Yankees. Vol-
untary  action  by  itself  will  always  be  inadequate  against  dangerous  foreign  oppo-
nents. 

Efforts  to  secure  the  Smart  Grid  are  a  good  example  of  the  problems  with  a  vol-
untary approach. Security standards published by the National Institute for Stand-
ards  and  Technology  in  August  2010  were  developed  by  a  consensus  process  that 
included  475  participants  from  the  private  sector  participants.  A  consensus  process 
involving 475 people is itself problematic. This is why the founders wisely opted for 
majority rule in the Constitution. A report by the General Accountability Office from 
January 2011 found that since these consensus standards are voluntary, there is no 
way  to  enforce  them  or  even  know  if  companies  are  following  them.  Perhaps 
unsurprisingly,  the  GAO  also  found  that  critical  smart  grid  elements  ‘‘do  not  have 
adequate security built in, thus increasing their vulnerability to attack.’’1 

Voluntary action has not worked, but some argue it deserves another chance and 
that we should pay companies to put better cybersecurity in place, using incentives, 
but that we should also not tell them what to do. This is a recipe for disaster. There 
is  no  other  area  of  National  security  were  we  rely  on  voluntary  action  reinforced 
by incentives. A policy of voluntary efforts for better cybersecurity reinforced by in-
centives is not a serious effort to protect National security against real damage and 
a  growing  threat.  These  proposals  are  best  seen  as  intended  to  block  reform  rather 
than to promote cybersecurity. 

Information  sharing  is  a  more  difficult  problem.  No  single  agency  or  company 
knows the full range of threats we face in cyberspace. The National Security Agen-
cy,  Cyber  Command,  and  DHS  have  part  of  the  puzzle,  the  big  telecom  companies 
have  another  part,  the  antivirus  companies  and  big  internet  service  providers  an-
other.  If  we  could  put  these  parts  together,  our  ability  to  protect  the  Nation  would 
be  significantly  improved.  Perhaps  20  or  30  companies  and  two  or  three  agencies 
would need to share information and be partners in a National defense. This would 
be a public-private partnership that could make a difference. 

And  of  course,  it  is  impossible  do  to  this  in  the  United  States.  Our  laws  and  our 
policies block the one area where we could have meaningful public private partner-
ship and information sharing that could make a difference. Some of the very organi-
zations  that  stoutly  proclaim  the  need  for  public-private  partnership  also  object  to 

1 GAO, Electricity Grid Modernization (http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11117.pdf). 

44 

meaningful  information  sharing,  the  one  area  where  public-private  partnership 
makes sense. 

After 12 years of experience, we can now say with confidence that a voluntary ap-
proach to cybersecurity based on public-private partnership and information sharing 
is  inadequate  to  defend  America.  These  are  elements  of  a  comprehensive  defense, 
but  by  themselves  they  are  not  enough.  They  must  be  reinforced  by  an  active  de-
fense that uses our military and intelligence assets, by flexible regulation of critical 
infrastructures  and  internet  service  providers,  by  a  strong  diplomatic  effort  to  ex-
tend the rule of law into cyberspace, and by expanding law enforcement cooperation 
in every country to which we are connected. 

In  December  2008,  CSIS  issued  a  report  by  its  Commission  on  Cybersecurity  for 
the 44th Presidency that laid out a number of recommendations for a comprehensive 
National approach to cybersecurity.2 While the report was well received, the imple-
mentation of the recommendation has been slow. In February 2011, the Commission 
issued  a  second,  final  report 3 that  assessed  where  progress  still  needs  to  be  made. 
We identified ten key areas and listed the tangible steps that need to be taken. The 
most important of these were the need for coherent Federal leadership, clear author-
ity  to  mandate  better  cybersecurity  in  critical  infrastructure,  and  a  foreign  policy 
that  used  both  military  and  diplomatic  tools  to  bring  the  rule  of  law  to  cyberspace. 
These are crucial areas for improvement, but each raises significant issues for the 
upcoming  legislative  debate.  One  issue  is  whether  DHS  or  at  the  White  House 
should  lead  cybersecurity  efforts.  In  this  case,  there  is  not  simple  answer.  DHS  is 
best  placed,  working  with  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards  and  Technology  (NIST),  to  develop  standards  and  regulations.  DHS  is 
best  placed  to  work  with  first-party  regulators—FERC,  FCC,  FFIEC,  and  others— 
to ensure compliance. On the other hand, the White House is best placed to develop 
a National strategy, to coordinate military, intelligence, law enforcement, and diplo-
matic  activities,  and  to  provide  Executive  branch  oversight  and  guidance  for  cyber-
security activities and for privacy protection. 

The  first  CSIS  report  discussed  a  new,  flexible  approach  to  regulation  that  gave 
the  private  sector  a  greater  role  in  designing  the  rules  while  leaving  enforcement 
to the Federal Government. Now, it is quite true that regulation done badly can be 
very damaging. There are countless example of that kind of prescriptive overregula-
tion  and  finding  ways  to  streamline  regulation  is  an  essential  task  for  America.  It 
is  also  true  that  no  regulation  leads  to  disaster.  Even  the  strongest  proponents  of 
deregulation  do  not  call  for  the  elimination  of  the  Federal  Aviation  Authority.  All 
the airlines mean well and do their best, but we do not feel comfortable leaving air 
safety to voluntary action because lives are at stake. We do not feel comfortable say-
ing to companies, you make the decision on whether to sell nuclear or missile tech-
nology to a foreign customer. We regulate them. Public safety and National security 
require it. Regulation is unpleasant, but in some cases, the alternative is worse. Cy-
bersecurity  is  one  such  case.  The  approach  proposed  in  draft  legislation,  which  is 
based  on  the  Chemical  Facilities  Anti-Terrorism  Standards  found  in  the  Homeland 
Security Act, offers a reasonable approach to better cybersecurity. 

Precedents for a new approach can be found in recent changes to the implementa-
tion  of  the  Federal  Information  Systems  Management  Act  Reporting  Guidelines  or 
in  the  Consensus  Audit  Guidelines  developed  by  a  consortium  of  Federal  agencies 
including  NSA  and  private  organizations.  These  guidelines  identify  technical  secu-
rity  controls  that  are  effective  in  blocking  high-priority  attacks.  They  show  that  is 
possible to identify practices that improve cybersecurity and measure their effective-
ness, since technology does not change too fast. I recently spoke to the Deputy Chief 
Information Officer of an agency that had implemented the guidelines—this was an 
agency  that  suffered  major  losses  to  hacking  a  few  years  ago—and  he  said  the  im-
provement  in  their  defenses  has  been  dramatic.  I  asked  if  the  Guidelines  are  not 
getting  out  of  date,  as  they  are  2  years  old,  and  he  replied  that  not  only  are  they 
are  still  effective,  that  implementing  the  first  four  guidelines  stops  most  of  the  at-
tacks.  It  is  now  possible  to  identify  effective  practices  and  continuously  measure 
how well they work—if they are implemented. 

A comprehensive strategy that coordinates military, intelligence, law enforcement, 
and  diplomatic  activities  is  essential  for  securing  a  global  network.  Reducing  cyber 
crime  will  require  a  strategic,  National-level  approach  that  uses  law  enforcement, 
intelligence, and diplomacy. The most sophisticated cyber criminals live overseas, in 
countries  that  do  not  cooperate  with  U.S.  law  enforcement.  The  problem  is  com-
plicated  by  the  fact  that  a  few  countries  tolerate  and  even  encourage  cyber  crimi-
nals.  They  use  them  as  proxies,  as  irregular  forces  to  carry  out  operations  for  the 

2 http://csis.org/files/media/csis/pubs/081208lsecuringcyberspacel44.pdf. 
3 http://csis.org/files/publication/110128lLewislCybersecurityTwoYearsLaterlWeb.pdf. 

45 

Government.  The  provide  resources  and  sometimes  training.  It  will  not  be  an  easy 
task  to  get  these  countries  to  stop  cybercrime,  and  there  is  little  that  the  private 
sector can do. 

Limitations  on  the  use  of  our  military  and  intelligence  capabilities  continue  to 
weaken  cybersecurity  in  the  United  States.  A  case  from  last  year  shows  the  situa-
tion. We are told that a leading American bank had its networks penetrated by Rus-
sian  hackers.  The  hackers  extracted  millions  of  dollars.  The  bank,  of  course,  said 
nothing publicly. But while the crime was in progress, it was detected by an Amer-
ican intelligence agency. As an intelligence agency with no domestic authority, there 
was  nothing  it  could  do  other  than  relay  the  information  to  law  enforcement  agen-
cies, a cumbersome process under today’s laws. By the time this was done, the crime 
was over. Active defense would have let the intelligence agency detect the incoming 
attack on the internet backbone, on the borders of America’s National networks, and 
stop  it.  Active  defense  could  be  structured  to  operate  like  NORAD,  where  the  Air 
Force  protects  our  skies,  by  focusing  on  foreign  threats.  It  is  not  perfect,  but  it 
works  and  other  nations  are  deploying  this  kind  of  defense  against  foreign  attacks. 
Active  defense  is  the  future  of  cybersecurity.  It  raises  two  key  issues,  the  first 
being the need for additional privacy safeguards and oversight and the second being 
the  division  of  responsibility  between  DHS  and  DOD.  Stronger  cybersecurity  prob-
ably  requires  a  new  approach  to  privacy  and  a  strengthening  of  existing  oversight 
mechanisms. To give two examples, the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, 
PCLOB, does not have cybersecurity in its legislative charter, nor is there Executive 
branch  guidance  (along  the  lines  of  Executive  Order  12333,  which  governs  intel-
ligence  activities)  for  agencies  in  how  to  perform  their  cybersecurity  missions.  Both 
of  these  reflect  the  need  to  adjust  our  laws  and  regulations  to  the  new  cyber  envi-
ronment. 

DHS  and  DOD  both  have  important  and  potentially  complementary  roles  to  play 
in  cybersecurity.  DHS  is  best  placed  to  work  with  critical  infrastructure  and  to  en-
sure  domestic  preparedness.  Only  DOD  has  the  capability  to  respond  to  foreign  op-
ponents.  There  are  still  coordination  issues  that  need  to  be  worked  through,  and 
some of these issues will be resolved only when the White House has a stronger role 
in cybersecurity, but the recently signed Memorandum of Understanding signed be-
tween Secretaries Napolitano and Gates is an important first step in building a co-
ordinated defense. 

The problem of international engagement is challenging, in part because for years 
the  United  States  believed  that  cyberspace  would  be  some  kind  of  self-governing 
utopia. As the security situation worsened, as cyberspace became a new domain for 
conflict,  and  as  the  political  implications  of  the  new  technologies  became  apparent, 
other nations have decided to extend government control into cyberspace. This trend 
is irreversible. The United States must engage with these nations in order to influ-
ence, if not lead, this restructuring of cyberspace governance, in order to ensure that 
the  political  values  we  cherish—openness,  global  connectivity,  and  freedom  of 
speech—continue  to  guide  development  of  the  global  network.  Thinking  on  how  to 
do  this  is  at  a  very  early  stage.  New  kinds  of  expertise  are  required  and  there  are 
only  a  handful  of  people  with  relevant  experience.  The  State  Department  has  just 
created a new cyber coordinator position and with the right support form Congress, 
this could allow the United States to regain international influence. 

These are complicated issues and the account above is necessarily summary. They 
receive more detailed treatment in the CSIS reports. However, in drafting the final 
report,  we  found  that  as  the  prospect  for  change  increases,  so  will  resistance  to  it. 
People  are  wedded  to  old  ideas,  even  if  they  do  not  work.  New  kinds  of  expertise 
are required for understanding cybersecurity. Above all, many still place some other 
priority above securing our Nation’s networks. 

It is this last point that worries me the most. When we look at nations that have 
fallen on hard times, losing their power and their international standing, very often 
it was because of internal problems. Often, the leaders of these countries knew what 
the  problems  were.  They  even  knew  what  the  solutions  were,  but  their  beliefs  and 
reliance on old approaches kept them from making the needed changes. So far, this 
has  been  the  case  with  cybersecurity  in  America.  We  are  in  a  new  world  and  face 
new  problems  that  old  ideas  will  not  solve,  but  it  is  hard  to  give  them  up.  Better 
cybersecurity is possible, but not if we continue to use failed approaches. 

This puts a great responsibility on Congress and the White House. We have a real 
opportunity in the next 2 years to improve our cyber defense. Doing this will require 
leaving  old  ideas  behind,  even  though  many  will  still  advocate  them,  and  moving 
to a new, comprehensive approach to cybersecurity that treats it as a major compo-
nent  of  National  defense  and  homeland  security.  I  thank  the  committee  for  the  op-
portunity to testify and will be happy to take any questions. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Ms. Kwon. 

46 

STATEMENT OF MISCHEL KWON, PRESIDENT, MISCHEL KWON 

ASSOCIATES 

Ms. KWON. Thank you. 
Good morning, Chairman Lungren, Ranking Member Clarke, and 

other distinguished Members of the subcommittee. 

My  name  is  Mischel  Kwon,  and  I  am  the  president  of  Mischel 
Kwon  and  Associates,  LLC,  a  consulting  firm  specializing  in  tech-
nical  defense  security,  security  operations,  and  information  assur-
ance. 

It  is  interesting  to  look  at  the  changes  and  advances  and  strug-
gles  of  IT  over  the  30  years  of  my  experience.  If  we  look  out  into 
the  future,  if  I  were  to  be  testifying  before  this  committee  in  10 
years,  I  predict  a  very  different  situation.  No  longer  will  govern-
ments  or  car  manufacturers  or  hospitals  or  electric  power  compa-
nies be in the business of IT. 

None  of  these  organizations  will  have  large  data  centers  and  in-
frastructures,  e-mail  servers,  or  application  programmers.  Instead, 
we  will  have  IT  providers,  just  as  we  have  power  providers  and 
health care providers. 

The  cloud  today  is  the  first  move  to  this  new  paradigm.  This 
movement  is  our  opportunity  to  fix  many  of  the  problems  that 
rapid  individualized  IT  growth  has  caused.  We  have  the  oppor-
tunity  to  build  security  in,  to  fix  the  IT  refresh  problem,  to  enable 
innovative  technology,  and  to  collapse  the  IT  community,  allowing 
better collaboration, communication, and sharing. 

In  looking  to  the  future,  it  is  important  to  recognize  where  we 
have  been  successful  and  where  we  are  stuck.  We  must  look  at 
where  IT  is  going  in  the  next  10  years  and  prioritize  what  we  are 
working on so that we are addressing the issues head on. 

We  have  had  significant  progress  over  the  10  years  in  height-
ening  the  importance  of  securing  our  IT  systems  and  infrastruc-
tures.  We  now  understand  the  importance  of  policy,  process,  tech-
nology, and detection. 

We clearly understand the need for information sharing. We now 
also realize we are all in the same infrastructure, the internet, and 
that the idea of sharing infrastructure is the wave of future. 

Much-needed  progress  is  being  made  in  the  modernization  of 
FISMA,  understanding  the  need  for  continuous  monitoring  and 
cyber scope that will enable the departments and agencies to have 
a  real  understanding  of  the  health  and  well-being  of  the  systems 
and networks supporting the Federal missions. 

It  is  critical  that  as  we  move  into  this  era  of  the  cloud  that  we 
are careful not to create home-grown solutions but rely on the pri-
vate  sector  and  the  COTS,  commercial  off-the-shelf  products,  that 
can accomplish the requirements needed. 

Difficulties  have  challenged  us  in  security  governance,  authori-
ties, and information sharing. Many of these issues have been com-
plicated  because  we  are  trying  to  solve  the  policy  issues  and  the 
operational issues at the same time. 

I do believe good efforts by good people with good intentions have 
been made at the Department of Homeland Security and across the 
U.S. Federal Government. 

47 

Today,  many  of  the  impediments  in  Federal  Government  that 
slow  down  efforts  to  improve  cybersecurity  are  caused  by  a  lack  of 
clear  governance  structure,  clear  defined  mission  spaces,  and  the 
authorities  and  budgets  to  successfully  accomplish  those  missions 
and understanding where collaboration is needed. 

I do believe DHS has a primary role in cyber. Though I have not 
always thought DHS could handle the important and broad mission 
of cyber because of the maturation level of this young agency, I do 
believe  the  operational  mission  of  US–CERT  belongs  to  DHS,  but 
as  an  autonomous,  operational  component,  similar  to  FEMA,  with 
direct reporting capabilities to the Secretary. 

I  believe  the  mission  of  US–CERT  must  be  more  clearly  defined 
to  enable  it  to  be  successful.  It  must  be  enabled  to  succeed  in  the 
important operational mission and firewalled away from the strug-
gles  of  policy  and  relationship  development.  The  appropriate  au-
thorities  must  be  given  to  US–CERT  to  allow  it  to  carry  out  the 
assigned mission. 

Effective and actionable information sharing and a public-private 
partnership is essential for cyber today and for the future. We have 
made  significant  progress  over  the  years  but  now  seem  to  be  in  a 
holding pattern, struggling with procurement and legal issues that 
have frozen progress. 

As  we  move  to  the  new  model  of  IT  and  the  cloud,  we  will  need 
to  take  two  steps:  One  to  understand  how  we  can  technologically 
share information more efficiently; and two, how the private sector 
can  take  a  leadership  role,  possibly  through  a  non-profit  organiza-
tion, to help free us from the holding pattern from both sides. 

We  are  moving  rapidly  to  the  new  world  in  IT,  a  new  world  in 
cyber  with  many  opportunities.  We  must  be  prepared  with  a 
strong,  well-defined  operational  US–CERT  that  has  the  autonomy, 
authority, budget to be successful in protecting the Federal-civilian 
space.  We  must  defend  the  shared  space  together  with  the  ability 
to share information through a healthy, public-private partnership. 

Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify. 
[The statement of Ms. Kwon follows:] 

PREPARED STATEMENT OF MISCHEL KWON 

MARCH 16, 2011 

Good  morning  Chairman  Lungren,  Ranking  Member  Clarke,  and  other  distin-
guished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify be-
fore  the  Subcommittee  for  Cybersecurity,  Infrastructure  Protection,  and  Security 
Technologies. 

My  name  is  Mischel  Kwon  and  I  am  the  President  of  Mischel  Kwon  and  Associ-
ates,  LLC,  a  consulting  firm  specializing  in  Technical  Defensive  Security,  Security 
Operations and Information Assurance. 

Previously  I  served  as  the  Director  of  the  United  States  Computer  Emergency 
Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  at  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  and 
as  the  Deputy  Chief  Information  Security  Officer  and  Director  of  the  Justice  Secu-
rity  Operations  Center  at  the  Department  of  Justice.  Most  recently  I  was  the  Vice 
President of Public Sector Security Solutions for RSA, the Security Division of EMC 
Corporation.  I  received  my  Bachelor  of  Science  and  Master  of  Science  from 
Marymount  University  and  a  Master  Certificate  in  Information  Assurance  from 
George Washington University. I was a Cyber Corps Scholar. In the nearly 30 years 
of my career to date as an IT professional I have been a programmer, systems devel-
oper, network engineer, program manager, and security professional. 

Over  the  past  10  years  the  U.S.  Federal  Government  has  been  struggling,  learn-
ing, and discovering what to do about ‘‘cyber’’. We have been moving on a continuum 

48 

that  started  with  the  discovery  of  adversaries  in  our  networks,  has  found  us  strug-
gling  with  how  to  manage  our  systems  through  the  Federal  Information  Security 
and  Management  Act  (FISMA)  and  compliance,  how  to  identify  threats,  attacks, 
vulnerabilities,  and  how  to  work  together  to  defend  our  networks.  As  we  move  for-
ward  in  a  constantly  evolving  world  of  technology,  life  as  we  know  it  is  changing 
rapidly. Soon, most companies, even Government departments and agencies, will no 
longer  have  data  centers  or  continue  to  own  or  manage  their  own  e-mail  servers, 
applications, or desktops. 

The use of virtualized IT infrastructure is the future. Virtualization, as the foun-
dation  of  cloud  computing  infrastructure  will  enable  the  ‘‘Cloud’’  to  be  the  provider 
of  most  IT  services.  You  may  say  this  is  jumping  ahead,  but  we  must  look  at  the 
answers to the questions you are asking with the near-term future in mind, and the 
near-term  future  is  now—as  many  departments  and  agencies  are  already  moving 
applications  such  as  e-mail  to  the  cloud,  many  are  building  private  clouds,  and 
many private sector companies are rapidly moving to the cloud. This is not only an 
innovative  solution  to  a  much-needed  technology  refresh  in  the  civil  government 
space, but if done correctly, could be the answer to information sharing, infrastruc-
ture-based  defensive  security,  the  cyber  talent  pool  shortage  and  guaranteed  life- 
cycle  management  of  our  infrastructure  resources.  No  longer  will  companies  or  de-
partments  and  agencies  with  missions  different  than  Information  Technology  need 
to  be  in  the  ‘‘IT’’  business.  No  longer  will  we  need  to  educate  the  heads  of  these 
organizations  and  have  them  making  IT  risk  decisions  outside  of  the  scope  of  their 
knowledge  base.  We  will  deliver  the  requirements  to  the  vendors;  the  vendors  will 
then  supply  the  appropriate  infrastructure  and  services,  with  security  built  right 
into the technologies and the offerings. 

This brings us to a critical crossroads in the continuum of cybersecurity. Not only 
are  we  at  the  point  where  we  realize  the  need  for  governance,  leadership,  and  co-
operation  between  the  Government  and  private  sector  in  order  to  have  a  chance  at 
combating  the  adversaries  in  an  efficient  manner,  but  we  also  are  now  at  the  part 
of  the  continuum  where  the  responsibility  of  protecting  our  assets  processed  on  IT 
systems—whether  it  is  data  or  an  operational  function—will  be  the  responsibility 
of  the  private  sector  infrastructure  providers.  This  point  was  driven  home  during 
the  initial  phases  of  the  Comprehensive  National  Cybersecurity  Initiative  (CNCI) 
when the Federal Government realized just how much of the internet is private sec-
tor-owned and -operated, and that even if we do better at securing Federal systems, 
we  can’t  improve  our  Nation’s  cybersecurity  posture  without  improvements  in  the 
private  sector  in  partnership  with  industry.  As  we  continue  to  move  infrastructure 
and services to the ‘‘cloud’’, effective and lasting partnerships with the private sector 
must be fully embraced and leveraged. 

Understanding  the  Information  Technology  roadmap  that  we  are  all  moving  rap-
idly on also increases the importance of enhancing the governance, authorities, and 
relationships that the Federal Government has between and among the civilian de-
partments  and  agencies,  the  homeland  security  and  law  enforcement  communities, 
the defense and intelligence community and of course, the private sector. 

As  I  move  into  the  portion  of  my  testimony  where  I  will  be  identifying  obstacles 
and problems I have encountered during my Federal Government service, there are 
a  few  caveats  and  points  I  would  like  to  make  clear.  First  of  all,  cyber  is  a  new 
field.  At  most,  we  can  say  this  is  a  25–30-year-old  industry.  We  must  understand 
this  is  going  to  take  some  time  to  mature.  We  will  and  have  encountered  issues, 
we  will  learn  of  new  problems . . . but  we  must  work  together  to  overcome  these 
challenges,  quickly  and  effectively.  Second,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security 
(DHS)  is  a  new  Department  and  because  of  that  it  struggles  with  the  fundamental 
daily functions of being a Department from procurement and budgets to hiring and 
operations.  DHS  is  going  to  take  some  time  to  develop  the  processes,  policies,  and 
procedures needed to run smoothly and efficiently. It will not happen overnight and 
will  not  occur  without  specific  actions  and  programs  to  improve  the  baseline  oper-
ations. In addition, DHS has a very broad set of missions and duties. Cybersecurity 
often  takes  a  back  seat  to  physical  threats  and  natural  disasters  in  the  daily  and 
weekly  grind  of  the  Department.  Congress  should  do  more  to  enable  the  cybersecu-
rity  components  in  the  Department  to  operate  more  effectively  and  independently 
without  getting  bogged  down  in  other  DHS  mission  spaces,  allowing  cyber  to  effec-
tively  operate  as  an  independent  component;  allowing  cyber  to  separate  itself  from 
the  quagmire  of  internal  politics  and  jostling  for  resources  and  mindshare.  Third, 
there are a lot of really good people who have worked this problem in the past and 
are working on cybersecurity challenges today. As we point out the weaknesses and 
problems, we must be cautious of tying the hands of dedicated security professionals 
who  are  currently  doing  battle  on  a  daily  basis  (unfortunately  not  just  with  adver-
saries  in  cyberspace,  but  with  the  bureaucracy  within  DHS).  We  cannot  afford  to 

49 

forget  these  people.  We  need  these  qualified  individuals  in  this  young  and  growing 
field. They make sacrifices with their families, careers, and personal sanity to serve 
our  country  in  trying  to  fix  these  problems.  We  should  take  the  time  to  remember 
their  service  and  take  care  not  to  diminish  their  contributions  as  we  examine  and 
address cybersecurity challenges in both the public and private sector. 

During  my  tenure  at  US–CERT,  we  were  at  the  very  early  stages  of  developing 
critical relationships with Federal civilian departments and agencies as well as rela-
tionships  with  the  homeland  security,  law  enforcement,  defense  and  intelligence 
communities,  and  the  private  sector.  It  was  clear  there  was  a  lack  of  governance 
and lack of authorities to carry out the poorly-defined mission US–CERT set out to 
accomplish. To examine this problem it is critical to break down the US–CERT mis-
sion  into:  (1)  Protecting  the  Federal  civilian  departments  and  agencies,  and  (2)  co-
ordinating and collaborating with the private sector. 

Governance  over  IT  in  the  Federal  space  has  been  an  issue  for  many  years  and 
to  date  has  not  been  solved.  FISMA,  which  was  enacted  in  late  2002,  was  a  start 
in  attempting  to  set  up  roles  and  responsibilities,  including  defining  the  roles  of 
Federal  CIOs  and  CISOs  enabling  security  structures  to  be  built  in  Federal  Execu-
tive  branch  departments  and  agencies,  as  well  as  establishing  reporting  process  for 
incidents  to  US–CERT.  This  all  being  said,  there  were  overarching  and  important 
components  of  a  success  risk  management  strategy  that  have  been  missing.  As  it 
stands today, the only requirement a Federal department or agency has is to report 
the incident to US–CERT in the dictated time frame based upon incident categoriza-
tion using a 20-year-old taxonomy that no longer describes the types of attacks that 
organizations are experiencing. This creates inaccurate metrics, and little to no real 
data  on  the  actual  attacks  that  are  occurring  in  the  Federal  civil  space.  US–CERT 
does not have the authority to require the departments or agencies to share detailed 
information, or follow any specific instructions. Departments and agencies interpret 
their  reporting  requirements  differently  and  therefore  each  reports  incidents  using 
different definitions and methodologies. When I was the Director of US–CERT if we 
needed  Federal  departments  and  agencies  to  follow  specific  instructions,  we  would 
have  to  have  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  require  them  to  follow 
the instructions. Despite even OMB guidance, the cooperation from Federal civilian 
agencies was consistently on the low end. 

Because  many  of  the  existing  IT  systems  are  owned  and  operated  by  Federal  de-
partments and agencies, there is no existing direct authority for DHS to require co-
operation  with  US–CERT.  This  being  said,  it  should  also  be  understood  that  some 
of  the  departments  and  agencies  have  more  sophisticated  operations  than  US– 
CERT. The security operations centers at State Department, Department of Justice, 
the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  have  a  much  higher  technical  monitoring  and 
response  capability  than  US–CERT.  In  order  for  US–CERT  to  accomplish  the  mis-
sion of protecting the Federal civilian agencies and departments day in and day out, 
US–CERT  must  be  empowered  and  its  capabilities  must  continue  to  be  developed. 
It  must  have  a  clearly  defined  mission,  authority,  and  budget.  It  must  have  tools. 
These  tools  must  be  determined  by  what  will  support  the  mission,  not  be  tied  to 
legacy  systems,  management,  or  contractors.  This  must  be  a  collaborative  mission 
between US–CERT and the departments and agencies. A ‘‘dictatorship’’ is not what 
is needed. Collaboration and cooperation will enable the road to success. Even more 
important  is  to  clearly  define  US–CERT’s  role  and  the  authorities  the  organization 
and  Director  carry.  Developing  a  ‘‘council’’  of  Federal  department  and  agency  Secu-
rity  Operations  Center  Directors  and  the  Director  of  US–CERT  to  help  guide  this 
mission  makes  sense  in  order  to  ensure  the  mission  of  US–CERT  stays  on  track, 
serves its Government customers, and has a focused and effective mission strategy. 
Today US–CERT is buried too deep within DHS. To even confuse the issue more, 
US–CERT is a part of the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration 
Center. Instead of integrating the NCC into US–CERT, yet another functional area 
has been opened, creating and compounding the confusion. US–CERT must be given 
autonomy to allow it to function as a successful operational entity—not laden in the 
political quagmire of DHS, NPPD, CS&C, NCSD. In my view, in order to be success-
ful, US–CERT should be removed from the National Cybersecurity Division (NCSD) 
and  treated  as  a  component  organization  similar  to  FEMA.  It  should  have  its  own 
budget that is not constantly diluted by other, projects, programs and internal poli-
tics  in  NPPD,  CS&C  and  NCSD.  US–CERT  should  have  a  clearly  defined  mission 
with attainable goals and the autonomy to succeed in this operational mission. Yes, 
operational. This is a roll up your sleeves and respond mission. This mission cannot 
be  performed  anywhere  else  in  the  Federal  civilian  government . . . the  White 
House  cannot  carry  out  an  operational  function,  the  DoD  cannot  perform  an  oper-
ational function of this nature domestically based on the Constitution, and no other 
department  or  agency  has  the  overarching  mission  that  allows  for  both  emergency 

50 

response and homeland protection. DHS makes functional sense; US–CERT must be 
empowered  to  fulfill  its  operational  mission.  As  it  stands  today,  US–CERT  is  con-
stantly  caught  up  in  political  priorities  and  much  time  is  spent  thrashing  around, 
attempting  to  service  too  many  projects  and  stakeholders.  A  clear  governance  proc-
ess  in  the  Federal  space,  a  clearly  defined  mission  and  the  authorities  to  support 
that  mission,  a  budget  to  carry  out  this  operational  mission,  as  well  as  autonomy 
to  operationally  perform  the  operational  duties  are  the  steps  to  US–CERT  having 
the  capability  to  make  a  difference  in  supporting  the  departments  and  agencies  as 
a part of DHS. 

US–CERT’s  other  mission  is  to  coordinate  and  collaborate  with  the  private  sec-
tor—specifically with critical infrastructure owners and operators—is equally as im-
portant.  Again,  great  mission,  but  rarely  accomplished.  The  work  is  often  clouded 
by poorly defined expectations and internal politics. US–CERT has absolutely no au-
thority  within  critical  infrastructure  that  is  owned  or  operated  by  the  private  sec-
tor—nor  should  it.  The  Federal  Government  has  no  claims  or  authority  over  pri-
vately  held  companies.  Even  in  some  of  the  current  draft  legislation  in  both  the 
House  and  Senate,  participation  in  Government-led  cyber  activities  is  by  invitation 
only. Today’s private-public partnership efforts are bogged down with the same rhet-
oric,  politics,  and  legal  barriers  of  the  past  20  years.  I  will  say  that  presently  US– 
CERT  does  little  of  the  coordination.  This  is  done  primarily  through  NCSD.  Most 
of  the  communications  is  done  by  the  CSCSWG  (Cross  Sector  Cybersecurity  Work-
ing  Group,  a  working  group  of  the  ISACs)  and  most  of  the  members  are  not  actual 
security professionals running security organizations, but a confusing mix of IT and 
communications  companies  with  individual  company-focused  agendas  and  little  or 
no  focus  on  the  operational  agenda.  An  operational  unit  like  US–CERT  must  be 
firewalled away from this kind of dysfunction to allow it to concentrate on the oper-
ation response mission. 

The relationship between US–CERT and the private sector must be a focused and 
well-defined  mission.  Prioritizing  work  with  the  infrastructure  providers—not  indi-
vidual  IT  product  vendors—such  as  ISPs,  web  hosting  and  caching,  cloud  providers 
and  IT  infrastructure  providers—to  enable  the  focus  on  the  operational  response 
mission. I understand the entire private sector IT and communications sector wants 
to  participate  in  future  policy  creation,  but  that  function  must  not  be  mixed  with 
the operational mission US–CERT must succeed in. 

So  far,  I  haven’t  painted  a  very  pretty  picture  of  what  is  going  on  at  DHS  in  re-
gards  to  cyber,  but  I  want  to  re-iterate  that  I  do  believe  DHS  is  the  right  place  for 
cyber. I also believe changes need to be made in order for DHS to have a successful 
cyber  mission.  Giving  US–CERT  the  autonomy  to  embrace  a  well-defined  oper-
ational  response  mission  (both  with  the  departments  and  agencies  as  well  as  with 
critical private sector players), with a budget and capabilities to execute on the mis-
sion,  and  authorities  to  enable  them  to  execute  on  the  mission  is  a  very  important 
step to success. 

Creating  a  successful  public-private  partnership  to  help  secure  cyber  space  is  yet 
another  mission  that  must  be  addressed.  I  think  we  need  to  approach  this  problem 
from  a  different  direction.  We  must  not  look  at  it  as  a  ‘‘cyber  space’’  problem.  That 
mission  space  is  far  too  broad.  We  must  look  at  this  problem  in  digestible  pieces. 
Internet  infrastructure:  Internet  Service  Providers,  Cloud  Providers,  Web  Providers 
and Information Infrastructure Providers. Separate this from the ‘‘cyber war’’ issue, 
separate  this  from  the  policy  and  legislative  issues.  Move  these  layers  away  from 
the  operational  mission  of  US–CERT.  Take  on  the  protect  the  infrastructure  prob-
lem first. Work on the information sharing problem with an operational lens. I truly 
believe a technical solution must come in order to break the stalemate we find our-
selves in with regards to cooperation and information sharing. The stalemate is cen-
tered  on  procurement,  legal,  privacy  and  proprietary  information  issues.  We  must 
determine  a  technical  function  for  anonymously  exchanging  information.  In  addi-
tion,  we  must  start  articulating  the  problem  with  the  same  vernacular.  We  must 
spend time redefining the taxonomy and vernacular we use to work the cyber prob-
lem.  We  must  do  this  in  order  to  establish  meaningful  metrics,  solutions,  and  fo-
cused solutions to the problem. 

The ancient category one through eight taxonomy, where 99% of all incidents are 
categorized as category three ‘‘malware’’—is useless in the world of complex attacks 
and  sophisticated  adversaries.  I  do  believe  this  will  become  easier  as  we  move  on 
our continuum to the cloud. I believe as it becomes a more defined industry and who 
actually  runs  the  ‘‘IT  infrastructures’’  (i.e.  clouds)  becomes  more  defined,  informa-
tion  sharing  will  become  better  as  a  function  of  how  many  entities  must  actually 
participate  in  the  defense  of  IT  as  a  whole.  It  must  be  understood  that  a  public- 
private  relationship  is  a  two-way  street.  Often  the  Government  is  left  holding  the 
bag of failure when it comes to this relationship. The burden here is not and should 

51 

not  be  solely  on  the  Government.  We  all  have  critical  information  that,  if  shared, 
would  help  the  community  as  a  whole.  In  the  near  future,  the  Government  will  be 
squarely  in  the  customer  role  as  we  move  on  the  IT  continuum  to  the  Cloud.  We 
must  look  at  how  the  Government  and  private  sector  can  shape  a  healthy  relation-
ship.  I  am  a  firm  believer  that  the  private  sector  needs  a  private  non-profit  entity 
that would facilitate the relationships of the many privately held IT companies. This 
non-profit  entity  would  facilitate  the  information  sharing  both  on  the  private  side 
as well as a focused conduit for information sharing with the Government. I do not 
see  this  as  an  inherent  Government-only  role.  I  clearly  understand  there  is  a  Na-
tional defense role for the Government in times of war, but we need to clearly define 
what  that  means  in  terms  of  cyber,  and  yes  that  is  clearly  a  DoD  role—not  a  civil 
Government role. 

This  being  said,  I  do  see  technology  developments  that  will  remove  the  legal  and 
privacy issues around information sharing. We must technologically come to a place 
where we can exchange information on a technical level about threats, attacks, and 
mitigations without disclosing information about the entity or entities involved. We 
must  focus  as  a  community—not  as  a  Government—on  moving  this  solution  track 
along.  We  must  be  mindful  of  the  circular  rhetoric  trap  we  get  caught  in  when  we 
hear the words—public-private partnership—and realize the actual work that needs 
to  happen  to  accomplish  the  goal—defending  our  IT  assets  and  missions.  The  work 
that  needs  to  be  done  is  to  create  technical  processes,  overcome  procurement  and 
legal issues. This must be done as a community, lead by the private sector. The Gov-
ernment’s participation should be as a member of the community. 

In  conclusion,  I  do  believe  DHS  has  a  primary  role  in  cyber.  Though  I  have  not 
always  thought  DHS  could  handle  the  important  mission  because  of  its  maturation 
level,  I  do  believe  the  operational  mission  of  US–CERT  belongs  in  DHS—but  as  an 
autonomous  operational  component  with  direct  reporting  capabilities  to  the  Sec-
retary.  I  believe  the  mission  of  US–CERT  must  be  more  clearly  defined  to  enable 
it to be successful. The appropriate authorities must be given to US–CERT to allow 
it to function. Public-private partnerships need to be rescued from the circling drain 
of rhetoric and lead by the private sector with Government participation. 

We  are  moving  rapidly  to  a  new  world—we  must  clear  our  plates  of  the  static 
yada  yada  of  stale  circular  discussions,  identify  the  operational  function  and  tech-
nical solutions. Empower US–CERT to succeed. Empower the private sector to lead. 
Empower the Government to participate. 

Thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  testify.  I  would  be  happy  to  answer  any  ques-

tions you may have at this time. 

Mr. LUNGREN. I thank you all for your testimony. 
I  thank  you  all  for  being  cognizant  of  our  time  limits,  and  I  ap-

preciate that. 

Dr.  Schneck,  how  do  we  solve  this  problem  of  stronger  protec-
tions for sharing information from the private sector to the Govern-
ment?  The  reason  I  say  that  is,  you  have  members  of  the  public 
who are naturally suspicious or skeptical of the Government work-
ing with the private sector and not protecting the individual rights 
of consumers and so forth. 

If  I  am  a  credit  card  holder  and  all  of  a  sudden,  I  find  that  my 
credit card has been cancelled through no action of my own, which 
happened  one  time  when  I  tried  to  present  it  at  a  restaurant,  and 
then  2  days  later,  after  we  called  one  of  the  major  credit—that 
night  when  we  tried  to  call  them—well,  first  of  all,  my  wife  went 
on  the  internet  to  find  out  what  our  account  was,  and  our  account 
was  gone.  Then  they  told  us,  well,  they  would  send  us  a  card  in 
a couple of days. Now, obviously there had been some sort of a loss 
of  security  within  their  operation,  but  they  didn’t  tell  me  what  it 
was all about. 

I  suppose,  so  long  as  I  didn’t  suffer  anything  beyond  that—how-
ever,  if  I  had  been  traveling  in  the  middle  of  the  country  and  only 
had  one  credit  card,  I  would  have  been  in  real  trouble.  But  they 
obviously didn’t want to share with me whatever that was; they be-
lieve that they took care of it internally. 

52 

But  members  of  the  public  might  be  a  little  skeptical  if  there  is 
this  broad  protection  that  no  matter  what  the  company  involved 
with  that  information  did,  as  long  as  they  shared  it  with  the  Gov-
ernment,  they  were  protected  from  any  liability,  on  the  one  hand. 
On the other hand, we want companies to come forward with in-
formation  about  how  there  has  been  an  intrusion.  We  want  that 
shared. 

Where do we strike that balance? How do we strike that balance 

from your point of view? 

Ms. SCHNECK. So, thank you, Chairman Lungren, I will start out 
by saying I am not a lawyer. I surround myself with a lot and actu-
ally find it fun. 

Mr.  LUNGREN.  Well,  we  have  an  abundance  of  lawyers  here,  so 

we need some help. 

Ms. SCHNECK. So, first, on the note of your lost account, it likely 

is somewhere in Romania, and we can help with that later. 

The issue is difficult at best from what we see. You said the word 
that I would choose, and that is balance. So, first and foremost, we 
are  not  talking  about  sharing  any  kind  of  PII  or  private  informa-
tion. 

This type of data looks at volumes of traffic, malicious code, mali-
cious  code  that  we  can  say,  at  a  human  level  and  at  a  machine 
level  for  a  lot  of  math,  looks  the  same  for  a  variety  of  parameters. 
One  might  be  an  encryption  algorithm  that  is  not  commonly  used, 
but,  look,  it  is  used  here  and  it  was  used  here  on  the  other  side 
of the planet within the same 2 hours from machines that have the 
same pattern of sending traffic. 

That  is  the  kind  of  data  that  our  analysts  and  we  call  our  col-
leagues within the sector and across the critical infrastructure sec-
tors,  and  we  reach  out  to  the  US–CERT.  We  reach  out  to  the  FBI 
National  Cyber  Investigative  Joint  Task  Force  with  this  kind  of 
data of, and then it builds into a much bigger picture. 

The  analogy  I  would  use  is  from  my  days  working  as  an  intern 
in  a  weather  lab.  If  you  see  a  lot  of  cold  air  above  a  lot  of  hot  air 
with wind direction in the opposite waves at certain levels from the 
altitudes  and  then  an  air  pressure  that  is  fairly  low  over  a  large 
region,  any  one  of  those  things  could  mean  just  a  little  storm.  But 
if you put those together, and you have a tornado, high probability. 
What we want to share is not the air temperature in every coun-
ty;  what  we  want  to  share  is  the  people  that  need  to  leave  their 
homes,  and  we  need  to  be  able  to  do  that  more  quickly.  So  there 
is a big picture that we draw. 

The problem is when you share out that big picture, such as XYZ 
is  happening  in  this  sector,  are  we  endangering  the  companies  in 
those sectors that we have already protected, both electronically as 
well as informing the humans in those companies, do we risk them 
having  material  shareholder  issues?  This  is  such  a  new  area  for 
policy. That is the problem. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Well, I would love to work with you and any law-
yers  that  you  might  run  into  on  that,  because  I  do  think  that  we 
have  to  have  a  greater  accessibility  of  information  in  both  direc-
tions, and sometimes liability issues will interfere. 

Let me ask you this. You used a great analogy, you said vaccina-
tion doesn’t work any more. Golly, I have McAfee on my computer, 

53 

and I thought I had vaccinated myself against intrusions. Now you 
are telling me that my attempt at vaccinating myself, my computer 
system, isn’t enough? 

Ms.  SCHNECK.  First  of  all,  any  security  provider  that  says  you 

are 100 percent safe, I would get rid of them. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Well, McAfee has never told me that. 
Ms.  SCHNECK.  All  right.  So,  second,  you  are  vaccinated  against 

everything that we in the community know about. 

The problem is the bad guy creates this code that changes itself, 
just  like  the  flu  mutates,  so  we  worry  about  the  new  vaccine,  in 
case your body can’t deal with the mutation of the disease and you 
get sick anyway. 

What you are protected by with McAfee is the view of the whole 
world now, so not just what we know about but what we are seeing 
happening right now. Believe it or not, you are able to be protected 
against  something  that  might  have  been  developed  on  the  other 
side  of  the  planet  that  comes  in  with  a  risk  score  so  high  it  may 
not have a name, but you are going to block it. 

That  is  the  new  paradigm  we  need,  and  it  is  not  just  our  data. 
We  need  the  ability  to  combine  our  data  with  data  from  other  sec-
tors,  across  the  energy  sector.  What  is  the  energy  sector  seeing  in 
cyber? 

As a vision for the future, to Mischel’s point, it will look a lot dif-
ferent and a lot better in the future and we can leverage the power 
of  the  cloud  that  was  mentioned  by  being  able  to  put  this  kind  of 
data together, infuse it into the fabric, and make things more intel-
ligent. 

Mr. LUNGREN. Thank you. 
My time has expired. 
The gentlelady from New York is recognized for 5 minutes. 
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Ms.  Kwon,  cyber  intrusions  affect  the  private  sector  even  more 
than  Government  networks.  Some  of  these  private  networks  in-
volve critical infrastructures necessary for our society and our econ-
omy to function. 

What  can  DHS  do  to  foster  better  cybersecurity  practices  in  the 
private sector? Does DHS need regulatory or enforcement authority 
for  critical  infrastructure  sectors,  and  should  the  private  sector  be 
doing more on its own? If so, why isn’t it happening? 

Ms. KWON. Well, this has been always the very difficult question 
because  our  critical  infrastructure  is  not  owned  or  operated  by  the 
Government. Therefore, the Government does not have any author-
ity over the private sector. 

What  is  needed  here  is  better  collaboration  and  better  commu-

Whether  regulation  is  needed  or  not,  I  am  not  a  regulator.  I  am 
not  in  that  kind  of  business.  I  am  a  technical  geek  by  nature.  So 
I will leave that decision to the lawmakers and the regulators. 

But  enabling  us  to  more  clearly  communicate  amongst  the  Gov-
ernment and the private sector and share that critical threat infor-
mation  is  actually—is  very  important.  But  even  more  than  that, 
DHS  helping  the  security  teams  that  work  in  those  critical  infra-
structure  environments  to  communicate  with  their  executives  and 
their  board  members  to  enable  the  financing  that  needs  to  be  put 

nication. 

54 

behind securing critical infrastructure is critical and important and 
to helping them accomplish their mission. 

Mr.  LEWIS.  Can  I  just  jump  in  on  that  one  for  a  second?  We  did 
a  poll  with  McAfee  recently,  and  it  found  that  two-thirds  of  the 
electrical  companies  in  the  United  States  had  found  Stuxnet  on 
their  system,  two-thirds.  Of  those  two-thirds,  only  40  percent  had 
taken steps to remove it. 

Does that make you feel good? Not me. 
I think if we don’t give DHS more authority, we will not succeed 
at this, and I think CFATS might be a useful model to think about. 

Ms. CLARKE. Thank you. 
Dr.  Schneck,  your  recent  report  on  Chinese-sponsored  hacking 
into our energy sector computers was very concerning. Is the indus-
try now fully aware of this issue, and if so, have you seen evidence 
that  they  have  acted  to  protect  themselves?  If  not,  why  not,  and 
where is the disconnect? 

Ms. SCHNECK. So, on the question of, is the industry fully aware, 
from  reports  like  these  that  we  have  done  with  CSIS,  we  consist-
ently get surprise answers back. So, for example, security spending 
last  year  went  down  with  the  recession,  even  though  awareness  of 
the  threat  went  up.  So  awareness  and  acting  may  not  always  be 
related. 

In  addition,  when  you  talk  about  being  aware,  although  many 
are  aware  there  is  a  threat,  I  think  that  both  public  and  private 
can do a better job of explaining what that threat really means. For 
example,  you  can  have,  you  can  have  the  malicious  code  on  your 
system,  and  it  wouldn’t  be  a  threat,  and  there  are  two  cases  why 
this is true. 

One  is,  if  you  are  not  running  any  systems  that  that  code  can 
actually access or use to your harm, you don’t need to worry about 
that  particular  threat,  so  we  need  to  do  some  risk  analysis,  back 
to the comment earlier about looking to the CFOs and the risk peo-
ple in each company; this is all a question of the risk. 

But  the  second  thing  is  there  is  technology  today  that  can  sit 
very  quietly  on  a  system  and  just  decide  these  X  processes  may 
run,  that  is  it.  Anything  outside  of  those  processes  simply  should 
not  run.  So  we  are  working  with  our  colleagues  and  our  partners 
on  how  you  embed  this  kind  of  technology  into  the  big  component 
levels  of  industrial  control  systems,  because  we  can’t  always  as-
sume everyone is aware. This rose so quickly, we can’t make every-
one aware, and we certainly can’t predict the next threat as quickly 
as the bad guy can send it. 

You  are  leveraging  the  power  of  light.  This  is  happening  in  bits 
and  bytes  at  the  speed  of  light.  So  what  we  can  do  is  say,  only 
those authorized can act. 

Ms. CLARKE. Thank you. 
Mr.  Lewis,  in  your  writings,  you  have  talked  a  lot  about  public- 
private partnerships for the cybersecurity mission. Can you explain 
to us what roles you feel each side needs to play? What, for exam-
ple,  are  the  inherently  Government  functions,  the  public  side,  and 
what  components  are  best  left  for  or  even  must  be  left  for  the  pri-
vate sector? 

Mr.  LEWIS.  Thanks.  That  is  a  great  question.  The  obvious  place 
to  start  for  me  is  that  development  of  technology  has  to  be  left  to 

55 

the  private  sector,  and  they  are  just  the  masters  at  it.  We  have  to 
let them do it. 

A  place  where  public-private  partnership  makes  sense  is  on  in-
formation  sharing,  and  it  is  easy  to  get  sort-of  distracted  by  the 
numbers in information sharing, but basically, there is a small set 
of  companies  that  have,  including  McAfee  and  Symantec  and  oth-
ers,  the  big  telco  operators,  the  big  ISPs  like  Comcast  or  Cox,  put 
them together with DHS and with NSA, and we will have a pretty 
complete picture of what is going on, on the internet. 

Now  there  are  legal  impediments  to  doing  that,  right,  and  that 
is  a  harm  to  the  ability  to  secure  our  Nation’s  networks.  But  that 
kind  of  focused  information  sharing  with  a  small  group  of  compa-
nies is a perfect place for a public-private partnership. 

On the other hand, there are some threats that only the govern-
ment  can  deal  with.  If  we  are  talking  about  the  Russian  military 
or  the  German  military  or  al-Qaeda  or  the  Iranian  and  North  Ko-
rean military, that is a government response, and there is no com-
pany—the  story  I  like  to  show  is  Google,  greatest  technology  com-
pany  in  the  world,  some  would  say,  didn’t  take  the  Chinese  very 
long to get through their defenses. There are some things only gov-
ernment can do. 

Mr.  LUNGREN.  The  gentleman  from  the  second-largest  State  in 

the union, Mr. McCaul, is recognized. 

well. 

Mr. MCCAUL. California is close behind, I might add. 
Jim, it is great to see you again. 
Dr.  Schneck,  thank  you  for  your  service  on  the  commission  as 

I  assure  the  Chairman  that  I  was  not  personally  responsible  for 
the 40,000 downloads of that report, but I will, I just want to com-
mend  your  leadership,  which  was  far  greater  than  mine,  in  really 
herding cats on some of the top experts in the Nation, putting that 
report  together.  Perhaps  we  should  call  you  the  bots  herder  in 
cyber terms, I don’t know. 

You  know,  15,000  Federal  intrusions  take  place  per  day,  so  you 
are  going  to  have  40,000  downloads  over  a  period  of  a  year  or  so, 
but  15,000  intrusions  per  day  on  the  Federal  Government.  As  was 
pointed  out,  the  three  levels  we  always  talk  about  is  the  criminal 
aspect, the espionage and the warfare piece. 

God knows how many are taking place in the private sector. I am 
sure  it  is  far  greater  than  that.  When  you  look  at  the  amount  of 
data that has been stolen from just the Federal Government alone, 
it rivals the Library of Congress, so it is a very serious issue. 

Jim, I just want to throw out just a very generic question. Since 
the  time  of  the  report,  I  think  the  threat  level  has  increased.  Do 
you  feel  that  we  have  made  any  progress,  and  do  you  feel  that  in 
any way we are safer? 

Mr.  LEWIS.  Thank  you,  and  I  do  want  to  say  that  I  believe  Con-
gressman McCaul is right in that there were lots of clicking noises 
late  at  night  from  both  of  our  offices,  but  that  wasn’t  the  cause  of 
the  downloads.  So  are  we  making  progress?  The  answer,  I  think, 
is, ‘‘Depends.’’ 

When  you  look  at  the  Department  of  Defense,  some  tremendous 
efforts with the creation of Cyber Command. When you look at the 
Department  of  Homeland  Security,  significant  improvement.  I 

56 

think  you  heard  Phil  describe  that.  Other  departments,  State, 
Commerce, have made some efforts. 

So,  overall  as  a  Nation,  OMB  with  its  efforts  to  revise  FISMA 
and  to  find  a  better  way  to  secure  Federal  systems,  those  are  all 
signs  of  progress,  but  it  is  not  enough.  We  were  behind  when  we 
started, as you know, and we have not caught up. 

So  do  I  feel  like  we  were  more  secure?  We  were  on  the  path  to 
being  more  secure,  and  I  think  the  work  that  this  committee  and 
others  in  Congress  can  do  might  get  us  there  by  2012,  but  we  are 
not there yet. 

Mr. MCCAUL. With respect to—I am sorry, Ms. Kwon. 
Ms. KWON. Yes. I just want to add something to that in that we 
do spend a lot of time talking about the success of DHS, but I also 
want  to  say  that  there  has  been  a  lot  of  great  success  among  the 
departments  and  agencies.  They  have,  over  the  past  several  years, 
stood  up  several  security  operation  centers  and  have  improved  the 
security amongst some of the larger departments and agencies, and 
I think that needs to be recognized. 

I  think  a  lot  of  that  comes  from  the  actual  awareness  that  has 
been  brought  to  bear  through  the  CSIS  Commission  and  other  ef-
forts in getting the word out that cyber needs to be a priority. 

But I do think, in looking towards the future and things that we 
need  to  improve  is  improving  that  communication  within  the  Gov-
ernment  on  the  Federal,  civil,  civilian  side  of  the  house,  getting 
DHS  to  work  more  closely,  not  only  with  private  sector  but  with 
the  civil  agencies,  CIOs  and  CISOs  and  work  that  improvement 
across the Federal space together. 

Mr.  MCCAUL.  One  thing  I  noticed  both  you,  Ms.  Kwon,  and  Jim 
mentioned  was  that  DHS  needs  more  authorities  and  that  you,  I 
think you mentioned appropriate authorities must be given to US– 
CERT. Can you be more specific? 

Ms.  KWON.  Well  US–CERT  does  not—the  authorities  US–CERT 
has  today  are  centered  around  what  they  have  with  FISMA  and 
the  reporting  that  the  departments  and  agencies  must  do  with 
them. 

The  problem  with  that  is  reporting  is  simply  reporting,  working 

together is not working together. 

So being able to work from a position of authority during an inci-
dent  with  the  departments  and  agencies,  to  request  information 
from  them,  to  have  certain  actions  performed,  it  is  very  important 
for  them  to  have  that  authority  over  the  space  they  are  trying  to 
protect, and they don’t have that authority today. 

But in giving them the authority, they also have to have the rela-
tionship  with  those  departments  and  agencies.  I  think  that  is 
where  we  are  falling  short;  we  are  talking  a  lot  about  authorities 
and  more  of  a  dictatorship  and  what  we  really  need  to  have  is  a 
collaborative  partnership  with  those  departments  and  agencies  so 
that they can take the actions needed in the time of an event. 

Mr. MCCAUL. I couldn’t agree with you more on that. 
You  said  something  interesting  that  caught  my  attention  that  I 
hadn’t heard before, and that is that the nonprofit could play a role 
in protecting the private sector. 

Ms. KWON. Well, I often find that private sector also has a prob-
lem sharing with themselves. So sharing information about a cyber 

57 

attack  is  very  difficult.  I  mean,  it  goes  to  reputation.  It  has  finan-
cial implications. It can ruin and crush companies, as we have seen 
in the near recent past. 

So it is important to be able to share. I think if we take the Gov-
ernment out of the picture and allow private sector to create a non-
profit  together  and  start  that  sharing  with  the  Government  as 
being  a  member  but  not  the  leader,  I  think  we  might  be  able  to 
find some success. 

I also think that there are different levels of information that we 
are  talking  about  here,  whether  we  are  talking  about  broad-threat 
information with attribution or whether we are talking about tech-
nical  TTPs,  ways  in  which  the  malware  works,  the  actual  code 
itself, how to detect it. 

Being  able  to  put  together  an  organization  that  can  share  those 
very  granular,  technical  bits  of  information  I  think  is  critical  and 
important in moving forward and a way in which we can do it cir-
cumventing some of the problems of law. 

Mr.  MCCAUL.  I  wanted  to  ask  a  question  about  Einstein–3,  but 

I see my time has expired. 

Mr. LUNGREN. We might come back to you. 
Mr.  MCCAUL.  Or  somebody  else.  I  would  love  a  grade  on  Ein-

stein–3. Maybe I will ask it in a written question. 

Mr.  LUNGREN.  The  gentleman  from  Louisiana,  Mr.  Richmond,  is 

recognized for 5 minutes. 

Mr. RICHMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
I guess this question is to Mr. Lewis. You were here when I was 
asking the question about the health, electronic health records and 
a  baseline  or  a  set  of  standards  that  we  should  have,  and  I  am 
looking  at  part  of  your  testimony  where  we  talk  about  the  smart 
grids and the voluntary approach. 

I  guess  I  am  interested  in  your  opinion  on  both  with  electronic 
health  records  and  the  small  grid  and  how  vulnerable  we  are, 
where we should be going and where we are today in light of where 
we should be. 

Mr. LEWIS. Certainly. Thank you. 
You  know,  a  lot  of  times  you  will  hear  people  say  that  we  don’t 
know what standards to put in place and there are too many stand-
ards  or  there  are  lots  of  standards,  and  that  was  probably  true  a 
few years ago. 

But we are now at the point where between our ability to collect 
data,  our  ability  to  identify  best  practices,  we  can  now  start  to  do 
things.  We  can  now  start  to  think  of  standards  or  mandatory  best 
practices  that  would  improve  cybersecurity,  either  in  health  or  in 
smart grids, in the electrical sector. 

So  I  think  we  are  on  the  cusp  of  being  able  to  make  that  leap. 
You  can  look  at  places  like  the  Department  of  State  that  have  put 
into place a set of standards that have been very effective. 

In 2003, State lost 3 to 4 terabytes of information to an unknown 
foreign opponent who probably lived in China. Three or 4 terabytes 
is about the equivalent of a third of the Library of Congress. Today 
that  couldn’t  happen  because  they  have  identified  best  practices 
and things you can do. 

So  I  think  we  can  say  now,  do  this  and  we  will  be  safer,  right. 

58 

When  it  comes  to  actually  putting  those  in  place,  HIPAA,  very 
old, very prescriptive regulations have immense drawbacks, and we 
need to find a more flexible approach. 

Smart  grids,  well,  it  will  take  a  while  before  it’s  secure,  that 

might be the nicest thing to say. It is not secure now. 

People are trying hard, but as I think I mentioned in my written 
testimony, the process that the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology  used  was  a  consensus  process  of  475  members.  One 
way  to  put  that  in  perspective  is  that  is  about  as  many  people  as 
there are in the Congress. Suppose you had to get every single per-
son  in  the  Congress  to  agree  to  a  rule.  It  would  be  a  challenging 
exercise, and I think that is what is in front of us. 

We can come up with standards. It is possible to say what works, 

but we don’t have the processes in place to do that yet. 

Mr. RICHMOND. Well, which is very long and especially when you 
talk about the smart grid, and now I think that my utility is start-
ing to experiment with smart meters on homes. Is that just as vul-
nerable? 

Mr.  LEWIS.  No,  fortunately,  because  it  means  that  an  individual 
home or perhaps a block of homes would be more vulnerable, right, 
because  the  smart  grid  itself  can  be  hacked.  But  it  doesn’t  mean 
you  will  be  able  to  hack  the  actual  power-generating  facility.  It 
doesn’t increase the vulnerability there. 

So  are  you  as  an  individual  more  vulnerable?  Yes.  But  as  a  Na-
tion,  is  our  critical  infrastructure  more  vulnerable?  Not  as  much. 
Mr. RICHMOND. It appears that in, I think it is just a given that 
we can accept is true, that this changes every minute, every second 
of  every  day,  the  risk  assessment.  I  know,  as  a  lawyer,  the  law 
changes  a  little  less  frequently,  but  we  are  required  to  do  con-
tinuing education on changes in the law. 

Is  there  an  industry  practice  where  the  chief  technology  officer 
or whoever is responsible for threat assessments, do we have an in-
dustry  standard  or  something  where  they  stay  up-to-date  with  the 
new  threats,  new  technology,  and  as  it  comes  abroad?  I  am  sure 
McAfee  probably  has  it;  they  do  it  on  their  own.  But  what  I  am 
thinking about, just smaller businesses, to make sure that they are 
aware of the seriousness of the threats. 

Mr. LEWIS. I think we all want to talk on this one. 
Ms.  SCHNECK.  So,  thank  you.  I  can  speak  for  McAfee,  and  I  can 
speak for the colleagues with whom we work. I will leverage a little 
bit of my experience. 

A  few  years  ago  I  ran,  for  about  8  years,  the  private-side  sector 
of the FBI’s InfraGard program. We grew that from 2,000 members 
to 33,000 members, bringing subject-matter experts across the crit-
ical  infrastructure  sectors  into  relationships  with  their  Federal, 
State, and, most importantly, local community law enforcement of-
ficers  and  Government  officials  to  share  information  about  cyber 
and about all the sectors as they are all connected. 

One  of  the  things  we  learned  very  quickly  is  our  small  to  me-
dium business base, about 60 percent of our GDP, was probably the 
biggest  beneficiary  of  these  relationships  because  without  that, 
they don’t have the access and the resources that we are privileged 
to  have  in  larger  companies  to  educate  our  executives,  to  give  our 

59 

executives  the  time  to  go  out  and  learn  what  is  really  outside  of 
your four walls. 

I  would  recommend  that,  not  just  our  organization  but  others, 
small  to  medium  businesses,  to  your  point,  need  to  educate  their 
executives  on  the  crossover  between  the  legal,  the  policy,  and  the 
technical  because  it  really—they  work  together  so  much  now.  The 
point  was  made,  a  beautiful  point  earlier,  about  how  we  are  now 
focusing on the chief financial officers and the risk officers. 

When we need to tell a company not to sell something but to un-
derstand  that  there  is  a  big  risk,  we  go  to  the  CEO  or  the  CFO, 
so  you  will  see  law  and  policy,  I  believe,  greater  value  placed  on 
that and more effused used in our businesses’ future. 

Mr. RICHMOND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. 
Mr. LUNGREN. The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Long, is recog-

nized for 5 minutes. 

Mr.  LONG.  Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman.  Mr.  Lewis,  I  don’t  under-
stand if I understood you right, were you talking about CFATS pro-
gram  when  you  said  we  should  emulate  that?  CFATS,  can  you 
elaborate on that? 

Mr.  LEWIS.  Sure,  I  think  it  was  in  Phil  Reitinger’s  testimony  as 
well.  This  is  a  program  for  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security 
that lets the Department set standards in cooperation with the op-
erators  and  owners  of  chemical  facilities  for  anti-terrorism  pur-
poses to make the chemical facilities more secure. 

It  is  a  little  bit  of  a  regulatory  authority.  It  is  a  little  bit  of  a 
partnership.  CFATS  is  not  a  bad  model,  and  there  are  things  that 
need  to  be  fixed  in  it,  I  think,  and  there  are  probably  some  issues 
on  liability.  But  it  is  a  way  to  say  to  the  companies,  here  is  our 
goal,  you  need  to  make  your  network  secure  and  here  are  some 
hints,  here  are  some  suggestions  on  how  you  can  do  that.  But  you 
can  do  whatever  you  think  is  best  to  secure  your  networks.  We 
have the ability to come in and look and say is it actually working. 
So  CFATS,  not  a  perfect  model,  but  it  is  a  little  more  flexible 
than  a  heavy-handed  regulatory  approach,  and  it  does  seem  to 
have had some success. 

Mr.  LONG.  I,  as  a  precautionary  note,  we  had  the  folks  from 
CFATS  in  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  and  I  asked  them,  after  4  years 
of  their  program  and  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars,  if  they  could 
name their top three accomplishments, things they had done. They 
said,  well,  Mr.  Long,  we  would  say,  No.  1,  we  have  identified  the 
problem.  So  I  didn’t  listen  too  hard  to  2  and  3.  So  before  we  go 
dovetailing  in  and  trying  to  emulate  CFATS,  I  just  want  to  make 
sure I understood which program you were talking about. 

Dr. Schneck, I think that you kind of answered my question that 
I was going to ask you and on Mr. Richmond, however, I just want-
ed to for the record state that there is a small business in my dis-
trict,  a  title  company,  that  had  $400,000  electronically  removed, 
and we think, over the weekend, this is within the last 12 months, 
$400,000 removed from their bank account, and we believe, the au-
thorities are telling us, that it ended up in Pakistan. 

When  we  had  Secretary  Napolitano  in,  I  was  asking  her  about 
if the Secret Service is the one that is in charge of that. She didn’t 
seem to think they were. The Secret Service had told us all please 
listen  all  along  that  they  are.  So  I  guess,  is  there  any  way  small 

60 

businesses  like  that  can  protect  themselves?  So  you  did  kind  of 
cover part of it in Mr. Richmond’s testimony. 

Ms.  SCHNECK.  Absolutely.  I  think  it  is  a  good  point  to  note  also, 
and  Ms.  Kwon  made  this  point  earlier,  there  are  many  agencies 
that  work  together  in  this  cyber  endeavor.  The  FBI  or  the  Secret 
Service, there are ways that they are interconnected. I think some-
times  when  we  name  one  agency  over  another,  we  don’t  give 
enough credit to that point. 

The  Secret  Service,  not  only  part  of  DHS  and  their  efforts,  but 
they are an integral part of the National Cyber Investigative Joint 
Task  Force,  which  I  analogize  a  little  bit  to  Noah’s  ark.  There  are 
one  or  two  of  each  in  that  task  force,  so  when  we  have  a  cyber  in-
vestigation,  we  call  them  directly  because  I  know  that  that  data 
that  we  can  share  will  get  all  across  the  agencies  more  quickly 
than if I make 20 phone calls. 

So  the  Secret  Service  or  the  FBI,  one  may  be  working  it  at  one 
point; the other organizations, like the US–CERT, the NCIC, every-
body is engaged at that point. 

There  are  things  that  small  to  medium  businesses  can  do.  My 
best advice from personal experience driving news programs at the 
local  level  as  well,  build  those  relationships  before  you  need  them. 
You can meet your State Homeland Security officers. You can meet 
your local police. You can meet—every FBI, every State has an FBI 
field office, some have more than one. Go in and meet, I would rec-
ommend,  the  cyber  people,  meet  the  Secret  Service  people  that 
work there. They are all friendly, and they really do want that out-
reach. 

DHS  actually  has  a  Protective  Service  Advisor  Program,  the 
CSAs.  These  are  Federal  employees  that  are  positioned  in  each  of 
our  States.  Some  States,  the  bigger  ones,  have  more  than  others. 
Their  job,  part  of  their  job  is  to  know  the  community,  know  the 
people there and know the mission of that State, and those are also 
great people and know they can tie you directly back to DHS. 

The resources are there. I don’t think we as a country have done 
enough  to  tell  the  smallest  communities  and  the  small  to  medium 
businesses that they are available. 

Mr. LONG. Okay, thank you. 
Ms.  Kwon,  for  you,  the  large  U.S.  banks  have  tremendous  secu-
rity  setups,  and  they  still  get  hit,  and  if  the  largest  U.S.  banks 
can’t  defend  themselves,  how  are  regulations  that  we  are  going  to 
impose, or what can we do to help the small businesses? 

Ms. KWON. Well, this actually goes back to the question with Mr. 
Richmond  and  is  a  very  difficult  question  because  often  imple-
menting  defensive  security  is  expensive  and  often  it  is  not  afford-
able  for  a  small  business  or  even  a  medium-sized  business,  or  in 
large corporations where large budget cuts have been seen over the 
past year, this is often a problem. 

I  do  see  the  future  of  moving  IT  out  of  the  individual  organiza-
tions  and  into  a  hosted  environment,  into  a  cloud  environment,  is 
a  good  defensive  mechanism  for  a  lot  of  small  companies.  You  are 
seeing a lot of that happening today, particularly in health care, as 
we are going to electronic health care records. 

You  are  seeing  a  lot  of  doctors  moving  to  IT  services  instead  of 
hosting  it  in  their  own  offices.  That  way  the  security  costs  can  be 

61 

spread  over  many  doctors’  offices  as  opposed  to  being  burdened 
with  one.  So  I  definitely  see  moving  to  new  ways  of  implementing 
IT as a good solution for particularly small businesses. 

Mr. LONG. Okay, thank you. 
I yield back. 
Mr. LUNGREN. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. 
I  thank  the  witnesses  for  your  valuable  testimony,  both  this 
panel and the previous panel. You have both help us very much as 
we  are  on  this  journey  to  ask  the  right  questions  and  to  come  up 
with  some  of  the  right  answers  and  to  see  what  the  proper  role  of 
the  Federal  Government  is  in  this  and  where  regulation  is  appro-
priate, where cooperation is appropriate. 

I  have  also  wondered  where  the  insurance  industry  is  appro-
priate  in  this,  since  they  seem  to  have  a  record  for  risk  manage-
ment  in  the  world,  and  how  you  join  all  those  things  together? 
Those  are  some  of  the  things  that  we  will  be  pursuing  with  this 
subcommittee. 

Some  Members  of  the  committee  may  have  additional  questions 
for  our  witnesses,  and  I  would  ask  you,  if  you  would,  to  respond 
to  those  in  writing.  The  hearing  record  will  remain  open  for  10 
days. 

Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned. 
[Whereupon, at 11:55 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.] 

A P P E N D I X 

QUESTIONS FROM CHAIRMAN DANIEL E. LUNGREN OF CALIFORNIA FOR PHILIP 

REITINGER 

Question  1.  The  various  drafts  of  comprehensive  cyber  legislation  that  have  been 
circulating  recently  have  attempted  to  re-organize  the  Department.  In  fact,  the 
former  Director  of  US–CERT  states  today  in  her  written  testimony  that  US–CERT 
should report directly to the Secretary. 

Is this necessary? 
What are the positives and negatives, as the Department sees them, to re-organi-

zation? 

Answer.  As  detailed  in  the  Quadrennial  Homeland  Security  Review  (QHSR),  cy-
bersecurity  is  a  recognized  and  vital  mission  responsibility  of  the  Department  of 
Homeland  Security  (DHS).  The  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness 
Team (US–CERT) is the operational component of the integrated capabilities within 
the  Department  to  satisfy  its  cybersecurity  responsibilities.  US–CERT  has  an  en-
hanced  ability  to  keep  DHS  informed  about  important  cybersecurity  events  since 
2009.  US–CERT  provides  watch,  warning,  and  response  functions  through  the  Na-
tional  Cybersecurity  and  Communications  Integration  Center  to  the  Government 
and  to  our  international  and  private  sector  partners.  The  US–CERT  provides  daily 
input  to  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security.  The  current  reporting  arrangement 
has proven successful through CyberStorm III as well as all cyber events that have 
occurred over the past year. 

Moreover,  the  QHSR  was  followed  by  the  Bottom-Up  Review  (BUR),  which  in-

cluded a plan for DHS to: 
‘‘Increase  the  focus  and  integration  of  DHS’s  operational  cybersecurity  and  infra-
structure resilience activities. DHS has substantial operational cybersecurity respon-
sibilities,  which  are  inextricably  intertwined  with  its  responsibilities  to  manage  all 
hazards  risk  to  critical  infrastructure.  DHS  typically  manages  its  operational  re-
sponsibilities  through  operating  components.  However,  the  majority  of  DHS’s  oper-
ational  activities  relating  to  cybersecurity  and  infrastructure  protection  and  resil-
ience  are  currently  administered  by  NPPD,  which  is  designated  as  a  DHS  head-
quarters  element.  DHS  will  focus  NPPD’s  activities  on  operations  and  more  closely 
align  cyber  and  critical  infrastructure  protection  and  resilience  efforts,  in  coopera-
tion  with  the  private  sector,  to  secure  cyber  networks  and  make  critical  infrastruc-
ture resilient.’’ 

Thus,  DHS  is  moving  to  increasingly  integrate  physical  and  cybersecurity  oper-
ations across critical infrastructure. Isolating US–CERT from that integration could 
degrade the Department’s ability to respond to complex incidents. 

Question 2. You mentioned in your statement that DHS signed an MOU with DoD 
that  ‘‘aligns  and  enhances  America’s  capabilities  to  protect  against  threats  to  our 
critical  civilian  and  military  computer  systems  and  networks.’’  How  does  this  MOU 
benefit the private sector, if at all? 

Answer. The Department of Defense (DOD) and the Department of Homeland Se-
curity (DHS) already work closely together, and this agreement formalizes a process 
to  increase  the  ability  of  each  agency  to  work  in  its  mission  space.  In  particular, 
DHS leverages DOD’s significant technical capabilities through its National Security 
Agency  (NSA).  To  support  DHS  activities  in  protecting  Government  civilian  net-
works  and  critical  infrastructure,  DOD  has  collocated  a  Cryptologic  Services  Group 
and  a  Cyber  Support  Element  at  DHS’s  National  Cybersecurity  and  Communica-
tions  Integration  Center  (NCCIC),  the  hub  for  responding  to  domestic  cyber  inci-
dents. 

Through  enhanced  joint  planning  and  better  visibility  into  each  others’  oper-
ational processes, the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) will increase each agency’s 
effectiveness and build on the capabilities of each. This in turn will enhance the re-

(63) 

64 

sponse capabilities of both agencies while dealing with incidents that may affect the 
private sector. 

The  MOA  does  not  alter  existing  DOD  and  DHS  authorities,  command  relation-
ships,  or  other  oversight  relationships.  The  MOA  will  not  extend  DOD’s  cyber  in-
volvement  with  the  private  sector  beyond  its  current  role.  DOD  already  operates 
within DHS’s National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) framework as the Sec-
tor  Specific  Agency  for  the  Defense  Industrial  Base.  Within  the  critical  infrastruc-
ture and key resources community, DOD works directly with defense industrial base 
partners,  DHS  and  Sector  Specific  Agencies  (SSA),  and  other  critical  infrastructure 
partners  in  developing  plans  to  assist  in  reducing  risk  and  better  securing  critical 
infrastructure information systems. 

Moreover,  the  MOA  provides  a  framework  that  enables  DHS  to  fuse  DOD  and 
NSA information, through the NCCIC, with that of the private sector. This provides 
all  parties  with  a  more  comprehensive  situational  awareness  of  cyber  activity  im-
pacting  the  Nation,  and  permits  all  parties  to  respond  more  effectively  to  those 
threats. 

Question  3.  How  has  the  OMB  memo  providing  DHS  with  operational  review  of 
Federal  CIO’s  compliance  with  FISMA  going  to  affect  the  cybersecurity  program 
within NPPD? 

Will taking on such wide responsibilities alter the priorities within the cybersecu-

rity mission? How will the cyber mission be affected? 

Answer.  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  Memorandum  M–10–28  ‘‘out-
lines and clarifies the respective responsibilities and activities of OMB, the Cyberse-
curity  Coordinator,  and  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS),  in  particular 
with  respect  to  the  Federal  Government’s  implementation  of  the  Federal  Informa-
tion  Security  Management  Act  of  2002  (FISMA).’’  It  assigns  DHS  immediate  pri-
mary responsibility for the operational aspects of Federal agency cybersecurity with 
respect to FISMA, including, but not limited to: 

1.  Overseeing  the  Government-wide  and  agency-specific  implementation  of  and 
reporting on cybersecurity policies and guidance; 
2. Overseeing and assisting Government-wide and agency-specific efforts to pro-
vide adequate, risk-based and cost-effective cybersecurity; 
3. Overseeing the agencies’ compliance with FISMA and developing analyses for 
OMB to assist in the development of the FISMA annual report; 
4.  Overseeing  the  agencies’  cybersecurity  operations  and  incident  response  and 
providing appropriate assistance; and, 
5. Annually reviewing the agencies’ cybersecurity programs. 

The memorandum enables new, proactive protection activities, which complement 
the  Department’s  pre-existing,  reactive  incident  response  activities  in  the  area  of 
Federal  Executive  branch  agency  cybersecurity.  While  the  United  States  Computer 
Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  is  already  focused  on  detecting  malicious 
activity  and  providing  incident  response  support,  the  new  activities  permit  DHS  to 
better  understand  the  Federal  Executive  branch’s  cybersecurity  posture  from  both 
an agency-specific perspective and on an enterprise-wide basis. Examples of specific 
activities  include:  FISMA  reporting  to  OMB  based  on  agency  periodic  reporting 
through  the  CyberScope  platform;  recurring  Cybersecurity  Compliance  Validation 
(CCV)  program  engagements  with  agencies;  and  establishment  of  Government  or 
private  sector  Shared  Service  Centers  (SSCs)  and  Blanket  Purchase  Agreements 
(BPAs)  that  deliver  cost-effective  security  solutions  to  Federal  agencies  and  further 
permit those agencies to allocate limited resources to more mission-critical activities. 
As it continues to implement the memorandum, DHS will conduct annual agency 
Chief  Information  Officer  (CIO)/Chief  Information  Security  Officer  (CISO)  inter-
views  to  maintain  awareness  of  agency-specific  successes  and  challenges.  Interview 
input enables DHS to better assess Government-wide and agency-specific needs and 
gaps, which ultimately leads to establishing new, targeted capabilities or processes. 
DHS  recently  also  began  conducting  CyberStat  reviews  with  Agency  CIOs  and 
CISOs in coordination with the National Security Staff and OMB to assist agencies 
in defining action plans to improve FISMA-related cybersecurity capabilities. 

Undertaken by the Federal Network Security (FNS) branch within DHS’ National 
Cyber  Security  Division,  the  activities  pursuant  to  the  memorandum  enable  DHS 
and  its  agency  partners  to  enhance  their  security  posture  before  incidents  occur. 
They  also  provide  US–CERT  with  a  clearer  picture  of  an  agency’s  networks,  sys-
tems, and policies when investigating an incident and providing support. 

Question  4.  With  regard  to  the  private  sector  the  Department  is  still  more  of  a 

coordinator rather than a directive authority, is that an effective role? 

Is the private sector being best served by DHS? 
What  additional  authorities  does  the  Department  feel  are  necessary  to  better 

serve and protect the private sector, and especially critical infrastructure? 

65 

Answer.  The  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  has  a  clear  authority  to 
conduct analysis, develop mitigation plans, and provide warnings with regards to cy-
bersecurity. DHS serves the private sector in these capacities on a daily basis. How-
ever,  nearly  all  of  our  private  sector  programs  are  built  on  voluntary  participation. 
These  programs  have  provided  valuable,  timely,  and  actionable  vulnerability  infor-
mation,  risk  assessments,  and  mitigation  strategies  to  our  private  sector  partners. 
For  instance,  both  the  Cyber  Security  Evaluations  Program  and  the  Control  Sys-
tems  Security  Program  (CSSP)  conducted  more  than  50  on-site  voluntary  assess-
ments  in  fiscal  year  2010.  Within  CSSP,  the  Industrial  Control  Systems  Cyber 
Emergency Response Team (ICS–CERT) provides on-site support to owners and op-
erators of critical infrastructure for protection against and response to cyber threats, 
including incident response, forensic analysis, and site assessments. ICS–CERT also 
provides tools and training to increase stakeholder awareness of evolving threats to 
industrial  control  systems.  The  United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness 
Team  (US–CERT)  also  provides  similar  vulnerability,  assessment,  and  mitigation 
information  for  private  sector  business  networks,  upon  request.  Similarly,  a  large 
number  of  private  sector  participants  take  part  in  the  Cyber  Exercise  Program,  in-
cluding the recent Cyber Storm III. These exercises are designed to increase the pre-
paredness of individual participants, and across the public-private response commu-
nity as a whole. 

Question  5.  What  is  the  goal  10–15  years  down  the  road  for  dot-gov  protection? 
Answer. Dot-gov protection is a complex, multi-enterprise issue. The challenge for 
dot-gov  protection  increases  as  the  complexity  of  the  Information  Technology  (IT) 
environment  and  the  data  and  services  consumed  become  more  distributed.  The 
technologies used to manage information and to create services that defend informa-
tion must evolve with the larger environment. 

Dot-gov  protection  must  transition  from  network  and  signature-based  security  to 
security  that  also  incorporates  information  and  user-centric  security.  Government 
must  adopt  IT  innovations  that  better  serve  Federal  dot-gov  users  and  the  users 
who interface with Government systems. To effect this transition, Government must 
make fundamental changes in the following areas: 
Security Operations 

Coordinated  Risk  Management.—Policy  and  standards  must  build  on  knowledge 
and experience drawn from various sources, including intelligence, law enforcement, 
industry,  Government  departments  and  agencies  (D/As),  and  others.  The  Federal 
Government  will  continue  to  play  a  significant  role  in  the  development  of  policy, 
standards, and countermeasures. 

Information  Sharing.—Information  sharing  that  ensures  the  rights,  privacy,  and 
protection of individuals and their information is critical—particularly with the con-
tinued  expansion  of  cloud  computing,  solutions  as  a  service,  and  social  networking. 
Distributed Execution.—Distributed execution requires increased partnership with 
D/As  and  industry.  D/As  must  continuously  monitor  their  networks  and  hosts  in 
order to provide insight into the health and status of Federal systems. Government 
relies  on  industry  to:  (1)  Build  product  capabilities  that  secure  customers,  (2)  de-
velop system capabilities to provide increased capability to self-heal, and (3) provide 
prevention-oriented  solutions  to  seek  out,  detect,  and  protect  the  user  from  mali-
cious actors. 
Technology Attributes 

Identity  Awareness.—Full  protection  of  dot-gov  requires  development  of  ‘‘identity 
awareness,’’  which  is  a  capability  that  provides  every  component  in  the  ‘‘service 
chain’’  with  the  ability  to  validate  identity,  ensure  its  authenticity,  and  provide  ac-
cess based on the role of that identity. 

Agility.—Advances  in  mobile  computing,  cloud-based  systems,  and  telework  are 
posing  new  security  challenges  to  the  traditional  concept  of  a  static  security  perim-
eter  protecting  private  Government  systems  and  information.  Government  must  be 
able to adapt as Government information is stored and accessed wherever an agency 
mission  requires  it.  The  security  challenge  associated  with  this  agility  is  deciding 
which  new  risks  are,  or  are  not,  acceptable  when  operating  in  a  dynamic,  mobile, 
and  cloud-based  computing  environment,  which  may  be  only  partially  under  the 
agency’s control. 

Diversity.—In  the  past,  Government  agencies  operated  relatively  homogenous 
computing environments; Intel-based workstations running Microsoft operating sys-
tems  were  the  norm.  Now,  we  see  a  proliferation  of  device  types  (netbooks,  smart- 
phones,  and  tablets)  joining  traditional  workstations  and  laptops.  The  industry  de-
velopment cycle is now measured in months. We can’t predict the next great device 
or  program,  however,  we  know  the  trend  runs  towards  smaller,  more  capable,  and 

66 

cheaper  devices.  Furthermore,  capabilities  begin  to  blur  as  new  generations  of  de-
vices emerge. For example, we now judge phones on their ability to run applications 
and  computers  on  their  ability  to  make  calls.  The  security  challenges  associated 
with  this  diversity  of  devices  ultimately  impacts  our  ability  to  secure  these  devices 
without degrading their capabilities. 

Convergence.—As  device  diversity  grows,  we  begin  to  see  a  convergence  in  net-
work  space  and  functionality.  Accessing  dot-gov  no  longer  requires  a  user  to  sit  in 
front  of  a  computer.  They  may  access  our  networks  from  any  type  of  network,  in-
cluding traditional Ethernet, telephone systems, cellular lines, or wireless networks. 
Gone are the days when we could devise protections based on relatively stable, pred-
icable  network  paths.  The  security  challenge  associated  with  this  convergence  ulti-
mately  concerns  our  ability  to  secure  these  pathways  without  disrupting 
connectivity. 

In order to address these changes, Government must partner with the private sec-
tor and academia to develop new security ideas. These new ideas must be based on 
an  information-  and  user-centric  view  that  enhances  new  capabilities,  rather  than 
impeding  them.  These  considerations  are  among  those  addressed  in  Enabling  Dis-
tributed  Security  in  Cyberspace:  Building  a  Healthy  and  Resilient  Cyber  Ecosystem 
with  Automated  Collective  Action.  This  paper,  recently  published  by  DHS,  presents 
a  five-level  maturity  model  for  ecosystem  focus  and  convergence  that  is  associated 
with increasing agility and provides an approach for achieving and employing these 
various  levels.  Ecosystem  maturity  is  further  explored  through  a  discussion  of 
healthy attributes. 

Source: http://blog.dhs.gov/2011/03/enabling-distributed-security-in.html. 
Question  6.  Are  private  sector  entities  responsive  to  the  efforts  the  Government 

makes with them to warn of threats and mitigate the consequences of attacks? 

Answer. Due to the variety of Department of Homeland Security (DHS) programs 
and  activities  engaged  in  collaboratively  improving  cybersecurity,  and  the  diverse 
nature  of  the  private  sector,  private  sector  responsiveness  varies  considerably.  Sev-
eral examples of private sector responsiveness are outlined below. 

United  States  Computer  Emergency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT).—Formed  in 
2003,  US–CERT  is  the  operational  arm  of  DHS’  National  Cyber  Security  Division. 
US–CERT’s  mission  is  to  lead  and  direct  efforts  to  improve  the  Nation’s  cybersecu-
rity  posture,  coordinate  cyber  information  sharing,  and  proactively  manage  cyber 
risks to the Nation while protecting the Constitutional rights of Americans. 

If a private-sector entity requests assistance from the Government, DHS may pro-
vide on-site or remote assistance to perform analysis and recommend mitigation ac-
tions  through  US–CERT.  This  assistance,  which  is  based  on  a  signed  request  for 
technical  assistance,  is  designed  to  assist  private  sector  entities  in  detecting  the 
scope of the malicious activity and determining mitigation actions to protect the sys-
tem  from  current  and  future  attacks  or  breaches.  In  addition,  US–CERT  provides 
standardized warning and mitigation information products to its private sector part-
ners  and  constituents  through  its  secure  portal  and  through  its  public  facing 
website. 

The  private  sector’s  response  varies  depending  on  the  entity  and  circumstances. 
However,  we  have  seen  growing  private  sector  interest  in  receiving  DHS  on-site  or 
remote  analytical  support.  Some  issues  that  may  inhibit  private  sector  responsive-
ness include concerns about: (1) Exposure of proprietary data; (2) prosecution or reg-
ulatory action; and (3) negative publicity. 

Cyber  Security  Evaluations  Program.—Since  2009,  the  National  Cyber  Security 
Division’s  (NCSD)  Cyber  Security  Evaluations  Program  has  conducted  on-site  as-
sessments  through  its  Cyber  Resilience  Review.  In  2010,  NCSD  deployed  its  first 
Cyber  Security  Advisor  (CSA),  located  in  the  mid-Atlantic  region,  to  promote  cyber 
preparedness,  risk  mitigation,  and  incident  response.  In  this  short  period  of  time, 
it has become apparent that many critical infrastructure owners and operators have 
a  general  awareness  of  cybersecurity  issues,  but  only  those  partnering  with  fusion 
centers,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation’s  (FBI)  Infragard  program,  local  com-
munities-of-interest, or those that subscribed to the United States Computer Emer-
gency  Readiness  Team  (US–CERT)  informational  products,  routinely  receive  Gov-
ernment-provided threat warnings. To date, only a limited set of owners and opera-
tors  have  been  directly  engaged  in  assessments  or  other  targeted  cybersecurity  ac-
tivities. 

Private sector entities, however, respond well when the Government solicits their 
participation  in  specific  initiatives  and  they  readily  work  with  the  Government  to 
identify  appropriate  subject  matter  experts  within  their  organizations.  They  also 
work  with  DHS  personnel  and  other  Government  representatives  to  develop  threat 
mitigations. For example, recent Cyber Unified Coordination Group Integrated Man-
agement  Team  operations,  under  the  National  Cyber  Incident  Response  Plan 

67 

(NCIRP),  used  joint  private-public  partnerships  to  raise  alerts,  and  to  focus  subject 
matter expertise and create tractable risk mitigations. 

Cyber  Exercise  Program.—Private  sector  partners  repeatedly  mention  that  Cyber 
Storm  and  other  DHS-sponsored  exercises  help  improve  their  individual  and  collec-
tive  cybersecurity  and  incident  response  capabilities.  The  number  of  private  sector 
organizations that played in Cyber Storm III represented a 75 percent increase over 
Cyber  Storm  II  (from  40  to  70  participants).  Private  sector  organizations  also  ac-
tively  participated  in  initiatives  resulting  from  Cyber  Storm  III,  including  develop-
ment of the Cyber Storm III summary and observations report, making edits to the 
NCIRP,  and  continuing  active  membership  in  the  Unified  Coordination  Group,  an 
interagency and inter-organizational coordination body that incorporates public and 
private sector officials. Private sector organizations from three critical infrastructure 
sectors  already  have  engaged  with  NCSD  to  conduct  follow-on  exercise  activities 
that examine operational changes made as a result of Cyber Storm III. 

Control  Systems  Security  Program.—The  private  sector  has  shown  growing  inter-
est  in  the  services  of  the  DHS  Control  Systems  Security  Program  (CSSP),  which 
works  with  public  and  private  sector  partners  to  improve  cybersecurity  of  critical 
infrastructure  industrial  control  systems.  Since  the  advent  of  their  activities,  CSSP 
and  the  Industrial  Control  Systems  Cyber  Emergency  Response  Team  (ICS–CERT) 
have grown in scope and received increasingly more requests for on-site incident re-
sponse,  assessments,  control  systems  training,  and  other  offerings.  The  statistical 
trend  from  year-to-year  indicates  that  the  community  as  a  whole  is  showing  an  in-
creased  interest  in  the  Government  program.  Their  interest  also  serves  as  an  indi-
cator of the effectiveness of the program’s outreach and awareness efforts. 

More  specifically,  ICS–CERT  works  on  a  voluntary  basis  with  critical  infrastruc-
ture  owner-operators  to  respond  to  and  analyze  control  systems  related  incidents, 
vulnerabilities,  and  threats.  The  team  can  perform  a  comprehensive  range  of  serv-
ices  and  activities,  including  providing  sophisticated  analysis  of  malware  and  de-
ploying full fly-away teams. ICS–CERT incident response teams (also known as fly- 
away  teams),  which  are  routinely  requested  by  the  private  sector,  deploy  to  critical 
infrastructure facilities bringing advanced and unique malware evaluation capabili-
ties  and  leveraging  our  control  systems  expertise  and  fused  intelligence  analysis. 
The team then works with the company to develop and implement a mitigation plan 
to  eliminate  the  malicious  activity  and  limit  the  risk  of  future  incidents.  The  team 
appropriately  addresses  sensitive  information  using  Protected  Critical  Infrastruc-
ture Information (PCII) protections and works to mitigate any privacy and civil lib-
erties  issues.  ICS–CERT  is  then  able  to  carefully  aggregate  and  anonymize  data 
about  the  incident  and  disseminate  early  warning  alerts  and  advisories  to  critical 
infrastructure owners and operators on a sector-by-sector basis. Actionable alerts to 
our  stakeholder  communities  include  threat  information,  validated  vulnerabilities, 
and related patches and mitigation strategies. 

Once the ICS–CERT actively engages with a specific private sector entity via the 
voluntary incident response process, oftentimes the company will continue to imple-
ment  the  mitigation  solutions  that  are  offered,  and,  if  needed,  request  additional 
support from DHS in the area of control systems security. Quite often these engage-
ments  evolve  into  trusted  long-term  information-sharing  relationships  that  benefit 
both the Government and the private sector. 

In  addition  to  sending  fly-away  teams,  DHS  is  also  able  to  proactively  work  with 
companies  to  conduct  cybersecurity  assessments  using  the  Cyber  Security  Evalua-
tion  Tool  (CSET).  These  no-cost  assessments  enable  users  to  assess  their  network 
and  ICS  security  practices  against  recognized  industry  and  Government  standards, 
guidelines,  and  practices.  The  assessment  tool  can  be  used  independently  by  the 
asset owner, or upon request, CSSP teams can assist with a full assessment on-site. 
The  completed  CSET  assessment  provides  a  prioritized  list  of  recommendations  for 
increasing  the  cybersecurity  posture  of  an  organization’s  ICS  or  enterprise  network 
and identifies what is needed to achieve the desired level of security within the spe-
cific standard(s) selected. The CSET has increased in popularity among our partners 
over  the  years;  in  2010,  for  example,  the  CSSP  conducted  50  on-site  assessments 
spanning  12  critical  infrastructure  sectors  (including  the  Electric  subsector)  and  is 
on  target  to  complete  75  in  fiscal  year  2011.  The  tool  is  now  publicly  available  for 
download on the CSSP website, and countless copies of the CSET have already been 
handed out at conferences and other events. 

CSSP  also  works  closely  with  the  Department  of  Energy  Idaho  National  Labora-
tory  (INL)  to  provide  cybersecurity  training  to  private  sector  employees.  The  train-
ing consists of a weeklong class held at INL, instructing in cyber protection and in-
trusion  mitigation  techniques.  Response  to  the  classes  has  been  highly  positive— 
thus far, DHS and Idaho National Labs have trained over 16,000 control system of-
ficials, from chief executive officers to technical operators. 

68 

rity mission? 

DHS  has  worked  closely  with  the  private  sector  as  it  expands  its  diverse  set  of 
resources  available  to  the  private  sector,  including  threat  and  vulnerability  situa-
tional  awareness,  risk  assessment,  and  mitigation,  and  remote  and  on-site  assist-
ance.  The  trusted  relationships  DHS  has  with  the  private  sector—through  engage-
ments,  working  groups,  co-location  on  the  NCCIC  operations  floor,  and  outreach— 
have allowed DHS to incorporate private sector input at every step as we build our 
capabilities.  Private  sector  engagement  is  a  cornerstone  of  the  Department’s  cyber-
security  mission  and  we  look  forward  to  working  with  Congress  to  continue  to  im-
prove private sector outreach efforts. 

Question 7. How does the cloud, or computing as a service, change the cybersecu-

Is  the  Department  prepared  for  the  Government’s  effort  to  move  more  and  more 

computing resources to ‘‘the cloud’’? 

Answer.  The  cyber  threat  environment  changes  continuously  as  malicious  actors 
adjust  their  tactics  and  adopt  new  technologies.  Similarly,  the  evolution  of  network 
architectures  necessitates  a  cybersecurity  posture  that  is  adaptable  and  focused  on 
risk  mitigation.  Regardless  of  changes  in  network  architecture,  the  Department  of 
Homeland  Security  (DHS)  will  continue  to  execute  its  critical  mission  to  create  a 
safe and secure cyberspace. 

Cloud  computing,  computing  as  a  service,  time-sharing,  and  utility  computing 
raise many of the same security issues that emerged when shared computer services 
were  created  in  the  1960’s.  Yet,  the  cybersecurity  mission  remains  the  same.  The 
many  advantages  of  cloud  computing  also  create  many  security  challenges.  We  can 
never  eliminate  all  the  risks  inherent  to  cloud  computing.  Instead,  we  must  accept 
that differing levels of acceptable risk will exist for different users. Even if private, 
community, and public cloud computing business models use the same security tech-
niques  and  tools,  different  business  models  create  different  security  risk  environ-
ments. 

DHS  encourages  cloud  computing  providers  to  propose  innovative  security  solu-
tions that effectively protect Federal systems, information, communications, and ul-
timately, the agency’s mission. 

DHS  has  avoided  requiring  providers  to  follow  particular  designs  or  architecture 
for cloud computing. For example, due to a constantly evolving threat environment, 
the  Federal  Risk  and  Authorization  Management  Program  (FedRAMP)  was  estab-
lished to provide a standard approach to assessing and authorizing cloud computing 
services and products. The National Cyber Security Division is actively participating 
in the FedRAMP development. FedRAMP allows joint authorizations and continuous 
security  monitoring  services  for  Government  and  commercial  cloud  computing  sys-
tems intended for multi-agency use. 

These considerations are among those addressed in Enabling Distributed Security 
in  Cyberspace:  Building  a  Healthy  and  Resilient  Cyber  Ecosystem  with  Automated 
Collective Action. This paper, recently published by DHS, presents a five-level matu-
rity  model  for  ecosystem  focus  and  convergence  that  is  associated  with  increasing 
agility  and  provides  an  approach  for  achieving  and  employing  these  various  levels. 
Ecosystem  maturity  is  further  explored  through  a  discussion  of  healthy  attributes. 

Source: http://blog.dhs.gov/2011/03/enabling-distributed-security-in.html. 

QUESTIONS FROM CHAIRMAN DANIEL E. LUNGREN OF CALIFORNIA FOR GREGORY C. 

WILSHUSEN 

Question  1a.  In  your  testimony  you  comment  how  the  Government  is  lacking  a 

National cybersecurity strategy. I have three related questions for that issue: 

How  is  the  lack  of  a  National  cybersecurity  strategy  hindering  the  Government- 

wide cybersecurity mission? 

Question  1b.  How,  in  your  opinion,  is  it  hindering  DHS’s  cybersecurity  mission? 
Question 1c. How is it affecting the private sector? 
Answer.  The  lack  of  an  updated  National  cybersecurity  strategy  can  hinder  the 
effective  implementation  of  the  Government-wide  cybersecurity  mission.  Our  work 
has  demonstrated  the  importance  of  comprehensive  strategies  that  specify  over-
arching  goals,  subordinate  objectives,  supporting  activities,  roles,  and  responsibil-
ities, and outcome-oriented performance metrics, as well as time frames to help en-
sure  accountability  and  align  agency  activities  with  National  priorities.  National 
strategies  help  shape  the  policies,  programs,  priorities,  resource  allocations,  and 
standards  that  can  enable  Federal  agencies  and  other  stakeholders  to  implement 
the  strategies  and  achieve  the  intended  results.  Without  such  an  updated  com-
prehensive National strategy for cybersecurity, increased risk exists that our Nation 
will not be able to obtain the desired posture against sophisticated threats. 

69 

Our  work  has  shown  that  Federal  initiatives  and  efforts  to  improve  information 
security have consistently fallen short of the mark. The following are illustrative ex-
amples: 
• In  October  2010,  we  reported  that  only  2  of  the  24  recommendations  in  the 
President’s May 2009 cyber policy review had been fully implemented. Officials 
from  key  agencies  involved  in  these  efforts  attributed  the  partial  implementa-
tion status of the remaining 22 recommendations in part to the fact that agen-
cies  had  not  been  assigned  roles  and  responsibilities  with  regard  to  rec-
ommendation  implementation.1 One  of  these  recommendations  was  to  develop 
an  updated  National  cyber  strategy;  however,  administration  officials  were  un-
able  to  provide  a  draft  strategy  or  milestones  for  when  the  updated  strategy  is 
to  be  finalized  and  issued.  We  concluded  that  Federal  agencies  appeared  to  be 
making  progress  toward  implementing  the  recommendations,  but  lacked  mile-
stones,  plans,  and  measures  that  are  essential  to  ensuring  successful  rec-
ommendation  implementation,  including  the  development  of  an  updated  strat-
egy. We recommended that the National Cybersecurity Coordinator (whose role 
was established as a result of the policy review) designate roles and responsibil-
ities  for  each  recommendation  and  develop  milestones  and  plans,  including 
measures to show agencies’ progress and performance. 
• Our  examination  of  Federal  efforts  to  address  the  global  aspects  of  cyberspace 
determined that the U.S. Government had not documented a clear vision of how 
the international efforts of Federal entities, taken together, support overarching 
National goals and that the Federal Government had not forged a coherent and 
comprehensive strategy for cyberspace security and governance policy.2 As a re-
sult,  the  United  States  is  hindered  in  promoting  our  National  interests  in  the 
realm  of  cyberspace.  We  recommended  that,  among  other  things,  the  National 
Cybersecurity Coordinator develop with other relevant entities a comprehensive 
U.S.  global  cyberspace  strategy.  The  coordinator  and  his  staff  concurred  with 
our recommendations. 
• Our  review  of  Federal  cybersecurity  research  and  development  efforts  found 
that  among  the  most  critical  challenges  was  the  lack  of  a  prioritized  National 
cybersecurity  research  and  development  agenda,  which  increased  the  risk  that 
research  and  development  efforts  will  not  reflect  National  priorities,  key  deci-
sions will be postponed, and Federal agencies will lack overall direction for their 
efforts.3 We recommended several actions, including developing such a National 
cybersecurity  research  and  development  agenda.  The  White  House  Office  of 
Science  and  Technology  Policy  agreed  with  our  recommendation  and  provided 
details on planned actions. 

The  lack  of  an  updated  strategy  can  also  affect  the  Department  of  Homeland  Se-
curity’s  (DHS)  and  the  private  sector’s  cybersecurity  efforts.  While  the  existing 
strategy  encourages  action  by  private-sector  owners  and  operators  of  cyber  critical 
infrastructure, we testified in March 2009 that a panel of experts agreed that there 
were not adequate economic and other incentives (i.e., a value proposition) for great-
er  investment  and  partnering  in  cybersecurity.4 The  panelists  also  stated  that  the 
Federal  Government  should  provide  valued  services  (such  as  offering  useful  threat 
or  analysis  and  warning  information)  or  incentives  (such  as  grants  or  tax  reduc-
tions) to encourage action by and effective partnerships with the private sector. 

In  addition,  we  reported  in  July  2010  that  public  sector  stakeholders  from  DHS 
and  other  entities  stated  that  improvements  could  be  made  to  the  public-private 
partnership,  including  improving  private  sector  sharing  of  sensitive  information.5 
We also reported that the expectations of private sector stakeholders were not being 
met  by  their  Federal  partners  in  areas  related  to  sharing  information  about  cyber- 
based  threats  to  critical  infrastructure.  We  concluded  that  the  public-private  part-
nership  remained  a  key  part  of  our  Nation’s  efforts  but  without  improvements  in 
meeting  public  and  private  sector  expectations,  the  partnership  would  remain  less 
than  optimal.  As  a  result,  increased  risk  existed  that  owners  of  critical  infrastruc-
ture would not have the appropriate information and mechanisms to thwart sophis-

1 GAO, Cyberspace Policy: Executive Branch Is Making Progress Implementing 2009 Policy Re-
view Recommendations, but Sustained Leadership Is Needed, GAO–11–24 (Washington, DC: Oct. 
6, 2010). 

2 GAO,  Cyberspace:  United  States  Faces  Challenges  in  Addressing  Global  Cybersecurity  and 

Governance, GAO–10–606 (Washington, DC: July 2, 2010). 

3 GAO, Cybersecurity: Key Challenges Need to Be Addressed to Improve Research and Develop-

ment, GAO–10–466 (Washington, DC: June 3, 2010). 

4 GAO,  National  Cybersecurity  Strategy:  Key  Improvements  Are  Needed  to  Strengthen  the  Na-

tion’s Posture, GAO–09–432T (Washington, DC: Mar. 10, 2009). 

5 GAO,  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection:  Key  Private  and  Public  Cyber  Expectations  Need  to 

Be Consistently Addressed, GAO–10–628 (Washington, DC: July 15, 2010). 

70 

ticated cyber attacks that could have catastrophic effects on our Nation’s cyber-reli-
ant  critical  infrastructure.  We  recommended  that  the  National  Cybersecurity  Coor-
dinator  and  DHS  work  with  their  Federal  and  private  sector  partners  to  enhance 
information-sharing efforts, including leveraging a central focal point for sharing in-
formation among the private sector, civilian government, law enforcement, the mili-
tary,  and  the  intelligence  community.  DHS  officials  stated  that  they  have  made 
progress  in  addressing  these  recommendations;  we  will  be  determining  the  extent 
of that progress as part of our follow-up efforts. 

Updating  the  National  cybersecurity  strategy  can  increase  the  likelihood  of  im-
proving  the  cybersecurity  posture  of  our  Nation.  Additionally,  an  updated  strategy 
could help ensure accountability and align agency activities with the United States’ 
long-term  economic  and  National  security  interests,  including  globally  promoting 
our National interests in the realm of cyberspace and ensuring that the Nation does 
not fall behind in cybersecurity and will be able to adequately protect its digital in-
frastructure.  As  the  administration  updates  the  current  strategy,  it  needs  to  focus 
on  clearly  articulating  goals  and  objectives,  assigning  roles  and  responsibilities,  de-
veloping  milestones,  deploying  sufficient  resources,  defining  performance  metrics, 
monitoring progress, and validating effectiveness of completed actions. 

Our responses to these questions are based on previous work that was performed 
in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards. Those stand-
ards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  sufficient,  appropriate 
evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our 
audit  objectives.  We  believe  that  the  evidence  obtained  provides  a  reasonable  basis 
for  our  findings  and  conclusions  based  on  our  audit  objectives.  Should  you  or  your 
office have any questions on the matters discussed in this letter, please contact me. 

QUESTIONS FROM CHAIRMAN DANIEL E. LUNGREN OF CALIFORNIA FOR PHYLLIS 

SCHNECK 

Question 1a. In your Although it’s oft repeated, McAfee shared with us that when 
they discovered the Night Dragon attacks, those Federal agencies who were not con-
tacted first, even maybe hours later, expressed their disapproval. 

How do you coordinate sharing the information with the Federal Government? 
Answer. We are committed to sharing threat information to help the U.S. Govern-
ment gain a deeper insight into the threat landscape and respond to specific attacks. 
Toward  this  goal,  we  work  closely  with  our  customers  to  ensure  that  we  adhere  to 
our  NDA’s  as  required  by  the  law.  Once  we  are  sure  that  we  have  met  all  of  our 
obligations  to  our  customers,  we  contact  representatives  in  the  various  agencies 
with  authority  over  cyber  security.  We  do  our  best  to  contact  all  of  the  actors  at 
the same time—whether in defense, civilian, or crime prevention institutions. 

Question 1b. Does there need to be a single source of contact? 
Answer.  We  believe  that  the  information-sharing  process  is  improving.  A  few 
years ago, we would experience, on a regular basis, a high degree of complexity and 
difficulty getting to all of the right decision makers in a timely way. We often found 
that  agencies  that  had  been  briefed  were  unwilling  to  share  information  with  their 
colleagues in other agencies. It generally took us 2 weeks to brief all of the officials 
in the agencies. More recently, we have found that the process is improving. During 
the recent Night Dragon event, we did one briefing, for instance, which included de-
fense, NSA, and FBI officials. This was an example of an improved process. 

We understand how complex the information-sharing challenge is in the U.S. Gov-
ernment.  Many  rules  regulate  the  way  in  which  information  sharing  is  done,  and 
there  are  limitations  on  the  types  of  information  various  agencies  can  share  with 
each  other.  These  limitations  derive  from  law  and  agency  regulations  that  seek  to 
balance  National  security,  domestic  security,  and  privacy  rights.  Nevertheless,  we 
would  urge  that  some  type  of  enhanced  procedure  be  put  in  place  to  facilitate  the 
ability  of  companies  to  share  information  in  a  manner  that  enhances  their  ability 
to share information in a rapid and efficient manner with the Government. Remedi-
ating  cyber  attacks  is  a  complex,  time-consuming  process  and  the  more  rapidly  the 
private  and  the  public  sectors  can  respond,  the  sooner  our  teams  can  ensure  that 
vital information and systems are protected from additional attacks. Bringing down 
the response time from weeks to a few days would do much to enhance the security 
posture of our country. 

Question 2. In a briefing to staff, McAfee brought up the technique of ‘‘white list-
ing’’ where a computer is essentially limited in what applications it could run, which 
could potentially limit malware from infecting a computer. 

Could you give us a little more information about the technique and how you see 

it being used most effectively? 

71 

Answer.  White  listing  technology  ensures  that  only  good  executable  code  can  run 
on  protected  systems.  The  technology  is  used  to  protect  servers,  endpoints,  embed-
ded  devices,  and  mobile  devices.  It  is  used  in  many  ATM’s,  point-of-sale  terminals, 
and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. White listing tech-
nology  narrows  the  scope  of  many  embedded  systems  to  ensure  that  an  attacker 
can’t install malicious code. 

White listing is one of the exciting technologies of the future because it can enable 
organizations to be much more proactive in protecting their systems—it gives them 
much  more  control  because  only  good  communications  can  be  received.  This  con-
trasts  in  a  considerable  way  with  the  older  model  of  security,  the  anti-virus  model, 
which  is  inherently  defensive.  This  model  is  based  on  blocking  malicious  code  and 
letting  everything  else  into  customer  sites.  This  model  has  been  breaking  down  for 
some  time  given  the  geometric  growth  in  malware  over  the  last  few  years.  McAfee 
detected  as  much  new  malware  in  2010  as  we  detected  since  the  founding  of  our 
company 19 years ago. White listing is an important part of the cyber security solu-
tion moving forward. 

QUESTIONS FROM CHAIRMAN DANIEL E. LUNGREN OF CALIFORNIA FOR JAMES A. 

LEWIS 

Question 1a. In some regulated industries, companies do only the minimum need-
ed  to  stay  compliant  with  the  regulations.  In  the  world  of  security,  the  minimum 
effort does not necessarily make one more secure. 

How does one prevent the ‘‘race to the bottom’’ in a regulatory regime? 
Question 1b. How do we change that culture of security to one not of mere compli-

ance, but security? 

Answer.  Doing  the  minimum  would  be  an  improvement  from  where  we  are  now. 
That  said,  there  are  several  measures  that  can  to  prevent  a  ‘‘race  to  the  bottom.’’ 
The  first  is  to  increase  transparency  and  reporting  on  the  number  of  probes, 
breaches,  or  service  disruptions  of  computer  networks.  By  reporting  on  the  number 
of security failures, we would be able to assess the effectiveness of regulations. The 
larger goal is to move companies to automatic monitoring of networks and to adopt 
something  like  the  ‘‘IT  Dashboard’’  OMB  is  putting  in  place  for  Federal  networks. 
The Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) NIST is developing is an example 
of emerging approaches that could automatic and accelerate cybersecurity efforts. 

The second would be to allow for some kind of ‘‘spot checks’’ of computer systems, 
random  checks  to  see  if  computer  networks  were  adequately  secured.  This  is  a 
standard law enforcement and regulatory technique, and could involve DHS or some 
outside  auditor  inspecting  the  adequacy  of  a  company’s  cybersecurity  efforts.  The 
knowledge  that  a  random  check  could  be  carried  out  would  in  and  of  itself  encour-
age better compliance. 

A  related  goal  would  be  to  avoid  defining  compliance  as  a  paper-driven  process, 
where  companies  filed  regular  reports  on  performance.  These  are  inadequate  for 
several  reasons,  but  the  most  important  is  frequency.  Long  annual  written  reports 
on  compliance  only  benefit  report  writers.  A  better  approach  would  be  to  require 
companies to immediately inform the appropriate agency when their networks have 
been successfully penetrated. This changes the metric for compliance. We want peo-
ple  to  report  failures  and  report  the  actions  they  have  taken  in  response  imme-
diately.  In  this,  a  regulatory  approach  would  be  part  of  a  larger  effort  to  develop 
a  broad  understanding  of  the  level  and  kind  of  malicious  activities  in  cyberspace. 

QUESTIONS FROM CHAIRMAN DANIEL E. LUNGREN OF CALIFORNIA FOR MISCHEL 

KWON 

Question  1.  In  your  written  statement  you  advocate  separating  US–CERT,  the 
operational  arm,  from  the  more  policy-  and  coordination-driven  NCSD.  I’m  inter-
ested  in  having  you  elaborate  a  bit  more  on  that:  How  does  separating  elements  of 
the  cybersecurity  mission  benefit  the  Department  and/or  the  private  sector  espe-
cially the critical infrastructure? 

Answer.  US–CERT  is  an  operational  unit  with  a  very  important  mission  to  sup-

port the Federal departments and agencies. 

(1)  This  mission  is  buried  deep  within  DHS,  which  makes  decision-making  slow 
because  of  all  the  chains  of  command  it  must  go  through  (NCSD,  CS&C,  NPPD). 
The operational mission is one that must be enabled to focus and act quickly. 

(2)  US–CERT  is  often  distracted  and  taken  off  this  mission  by  the  policy  and  co-

ordination arm of NCSD. 

Cyber  is  a  fast-moving  space  where  nimbleness  is  important  for  success.  It  often 
takes  US–CERT  days,  even  weeks,  to  get  approval  for  actions  because  of  the  need 
to  go  through  NCSD,  CS&S,  NPPD,  and  then  to  get  to  the  Secretaries’  attention. 

72 

As issues go through this chain they are often distracted by politics and other prior-
ities and delayed further, or veered off from the operationally correct decision. US– 
CERT is often volunteered for programs and projects by the policy and coordination 
arm,  thereby  taking  it  off  its  core  mission  and  into  projects  that  are  not  planned 
for, budgeted for, or in the scope of their expertise. 

It is important for this operational mission to be clear. There must be firm process 
for changing this mission. It cannot be constantly changing and moving at the whim 
of  politics  driven  by  a  policy  team  seeking  its  own  success  at  the  price  of  US– 
CERT’s. 

Today, US–CERT’s clear mission—as stated in FISMA—is to support the Federal 
departments  and  agencies.  If  you  were  to  ask  the  major  departments  and  agencies 
how  often  US–CERT  assists  them,  you  will  be  surprised  to  find  out  that  it  is  very 
little.  US–CERT’s  focus  is  very  fragmented  and  confused.  It  has  been  tasked  by 
NCSD,  CS&S,  and  NPPD  to  participate  in  a  plethora  of  other  projects  that  take 
US–CERT’s understaffed, under budgeted, and technology-limited National security 
operations unit far away from its legislated mission space. 

Question 2a. While you were with US–CERT, how often did you provide technical 

assistance to private sector entities? 

Answer.  Once.  This  is  not  US–CERT’s  mission,  nor  do  they  have  the  expertise, 

staff, or budget to assist the private sector on a regular basis. 

Question 2b. Does the Department have an established process for private entities 

to request assistance? 

Answer. No. 
Question 2c. If so, how can it be improved? If not, what should it look like? 
Answer. If US–CERT is to take on the mission of assisting private sector entities 
it would have to have an increase in budget, staffing, and tools. Currently, it is not 
their mission to assist private sector entities. 

Question  3a.  In  your  testimony,  you  stated  that  virtualization  through  ‘‘cloud’’ 

technologies is the future for information technology infrastructures. 

What  are  the  security  risks  of  moving  systems  and  applications  to  the  ‘‘cloud’’? 
Answer.  The  security  risks  are  similar  to  those  of  any  IT  infrastructure.  The  key 
here  is  that  moving  to  the  ‘‘cloud’’  is  an  opportunity  to  bake  security  in,  build  it 
more securely, and revitalize IT infrastructure and share in the cost of better secu-
rity mechanisms. 

Question 3b. Will we be more secure or less secure from cyber attacks? 
Answer.  It  depends.  If  the  opportunity  to  improve  security  is  taken,  it  could  be 

more secure, if not . . . no. 

Question 3c. If the Federal Government and private companies are moving to the 
‘‘cloud,’’  what  precautionary  measures  should  be  taken  to  maintain  the  integrity  of 
these information systems? 

Answer.  First  and  foremost,  we  should  be  looking  at  new  security  technologies. 
Technologies  where  we  can  cleanse  the  known  malware  from  the  infrastructure 
layer.  We  need  to  move  to  technologies  that  allow  us  to  understand  what  is  good 
and what is bad. We need to move away from signature-based tools where we have 
to be infected first in order to detect the attack. We must move to a more defensive 
posture  where  the  attacks  can  be  detected  and  stopped  on  the  infrastructure  layer, 
before they reach the users. 

Question 4a. In your testimony you discussed the stalemate of cooperation and in-
formation  sharing  with  the  private  sector  as  a  result  of  procurement,  privacy,  and 
proprietary information issues. 

Answer.  First  it  must  be  understood  that  most  networks  have  already  been  com-
promised. It is actually the rare few who identify the intrusions. With this in mind, 
we must not take a position of punishment for those who identify the problems, but 
we must assist. We cannot allow cyber attacks to defeat our private or public sector 
entities. 

Question 4b. What actions need to be taken to aggregate shared information about 

known cyber vulnerabilities from the private sector? 

Answer.  I’m  not  sure  cyber  vulnerabilities  are  the  problem.  We  know  about  mil-
lions of vulnerabilities. We need to understand more about the attacks. As a commu-
nity—whether  we  are  private  or  public—we  need  to  know  more  about  the  details 
of the attack that would enable detection. Not the ‘‘who’’, not the ‘‘what’’ was taken, 
but the TTPs, The Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures the attackers use. I believe, 
for both private and public, we need an autonomous entity (I referred to this in my 
testimony  as  a  non-profit  organization)  that  can  take  anonymous  TTP  information 
and make it available for others to use. 

Question  4c.  What  other  measures  should  be  taken  to  encourage  private  sector’s 

willingness to share information? 

Answer.  There  are  a  few  places  where  this  can  be  improved  for  both  private  and 

public sectors. 

(1)  Take  the  attacks  and  the  responses  out  of  the  public  and  press.  You  must 
take the reputational damage issue off the table. 
(2) Lower the liability concerns. 
(3) Have an anonymous way to share. 

73 

Æ 

