                                                           Inter-Agency Cooperation:    The New Security Paradigm in the   21st Century   by   Colonel Jeffrey W. Jurasek   United States Army      United States Army War College   Class of 2012   DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT: A  Approved for Public Release Distribution   is Unlimited   This manuscript is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of  Strategic Studies Degree.
0704-0188   Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time fo r reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the  data needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information.
Send comments regarding this burden estimate or an y other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing  this burden to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA  22202-  4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a curren tly  valid OMB control number.
CONTRACT NUMBER   Inter-Agency Cooperation: The New Security Paradigm in the 21st  Century   5b.
WORK UNIT NUMBER   7.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)   8.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT   NUMBER   William J. Flavin  US Army Peacekeeping Stability  Operations Institute   9.
ABSTRACT  The security paradigm has changed.
To confront this new threat the United States must  use all elements of its national power, and for this power to be used successfully, it must be coordinated and work in tandem to  ensure unity of effort.
The Military will assume new mission that involve not only defense, but development and diplomacy (3D)  as well.
The 3D’s will be used to strengthen partner nation security in an attempt to face this new security threat before it  escalates into another 9/11 event.
Interagency cooperation will be critical as this new paradigm comes on line and all parties  learn to understand each other’s culture and how best to work together to achieve the desired effects/outcomes that will  secure our national objectives, as we face this new security challenges of the 21st  century   15.
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:   a.
TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area  code)   Standard Form 298 (Rev.
Z39.18                                                                                     USAWC STRATEGY RESEARCH PROJECT   INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION:    ST CENTURY   THE NEW SECURITY PARADIGM IN THE 21  by   Colonel Jeffrey W. Jurasek   United States Army   William Flavin  Project Adviser   This SRP is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Master of Strategic  Studies  Degree.
U.S. Army War College   CARLISLE BARRACKS, PENNSYLVANIA 17013      AUTHOR:   Colonel Jeffrey W. Jurasek   ABSTRACT   TITLE:   Inter-Agency Cooperation: The New Security Paradigm in the 21st   Century   FORMAT:   Strategy Research Project   DATE:   22 March 2012   WORD COUNT: 5,490   PAGES: 24   KEY TERMS:   Irregular Warfare, Whole of Government, 3D Paradigm   CLASSIFICATION:  Unclassified                            The security paradigm has changed.
To confront   this new threat the United States must use all elements of its national power, and for   this power to be used successfully, it must be coordinated and work in tandem to   ensure unity of effort.
The Military will assume new mission that involve not only   defense, but development and diplomacy (3D) as well.
The 3D’s will be used to   strengthen partner nation security in an attempt to face this new security threat before it   escalates into another 9/11 event.
Interagency cooperation will be critical as this new   paradigm comes on line and all parties learn to understand each other’s culture and   how best to work together to achieve the desired effects/outcomes that will secure our   national objectives, as we face this new security challenges of the 21st  century.
INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION:    THE NEW SECURITY PARADIGM IN THE 21  ST CENTURY             There is an understanding that there is a need for interagency cooperation and   collaboration to ensure that all elements of the U.S. Government are consistent as to   our foreign policy and to maximize unity of effort but before we can talk about the need   for inter-agency cooperation and collaboration, we will need to discuss how this need   came about.
Technological advancements in the inter-net and social media   have connected people around the world in a way that has never before been seen.
?3   Both super powers had stable   governments and institutions that assisted other nation states in maintaining control of   the populations.
However, with globalization, the balancing of the two super powers is   not there, but rather, globalization has its own systems that balance out the world, those   being between nation-states, nation-states and global markets and individuals and   nation states.4   With the different forces balancing out the globalized world, developing   states are finding it hard to maintain good governance and sustain adequate institutions,   to maintain control over their territories.
It is this lack of control over large areas within a   nation state that is ?becoming safe havens for violent political actors?5   It is these violent   political actors that are able to disrupt governments through political violence and   through their actions is able to weaken a state and make it more vulnerable to civil war   and insurgency.6     The new threats facing the United States in the 21st century are many, but the   one that stand out as the most critical if left unchecked, is trans-national threats.
?7   The   new threat, that is the root enabler for terrorist and other international crimes, is the   failed and failing states.
It is these failed or failing states that are considered a national   security issue for the United States.
They are such a concern that they have been   mentioned in the U.S. National Security Strategy since 19988.
The problems associated with failed and failing states, which makes them a   national security issues for the U.S. is that these states ?provide safe havens for   terrorists, organized crime, and other illicit groups; causing or exacerbating conflict,   regional instability and humanitarian emergencies; and undermine efforts to promote   democracy, good governance and economic stability.
The whole of government approach was   brought about with the understanding that, no one agency, can manage the threats of   today on its own.
President Obama spelled   out this whole of government approach in his 2010 National Security Strategy (NSS) of   the United States.
In the NSS it states that ?To succeed, we must update, balance, and   integrate all of the tools of American power and work with our allies and partners to do   the same.
?11  The tools referred to by President Obama are: Defense, Diplomacy,   Economic, Development, Homeland Security, Intelligence, Strategic Communications,   The American People and the Private Sector.
Military Engagements Other Then War   With the new threats to the United States in mind, the Department of Defense   has adjusted its doctrine and adopted the Development, Diplomacy and Defense (3D)   paradigm for addressing these new threats.
This 3D paradigm requires the DoD to   develop new ways of coordinating and cooperating with agencies, such as the   Department of State, before, during and after any operation that may have parallel line   of operations.
The goal is to work in conjunction with, not against each other to   maximize efforts and reduce costs.
As the militaries are now   faced with threats that are no longer Nation State legitimate militaries, in which they can   use their technologically advanced equipment in which they could quickly meet and   3         defeat quickly.
The military now has to adapt to a new ways of defeating the threats to   the U.S. that requires more than the use of advanced weapon systems.
These new operations involve assisting partner nations develop their capacity in   governance, legitimacy, infrastructure, rule of law, defense, and professionalization to   their militaries.
Some actors that are involved in the 3D operations are the State Department,   United States Agency for International Development (USAID), international   organizations, government and Non-government organizations.
All of these actors, if   working together, can accomplish more than if they act independently.
The DoD is well manned and   equipped to engage quickly and have the institutional knowledge to assist in developing   a partner nations security forces.
The State Department is already actively involved in      4   diplomacy and has the expertise to assist nations in democratization and building   infrastructure through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID)   office which operates from U.S. Embassies around the world.
However, most 3D operations are taking   place in non-combat zones, and as such, DoD would not be the lead agency but rather   control would fall under the direction of the U.S. ambassador in the state in question   The DoD components will be answering to civilian control and will assist in meeting the   national security objectives of all parts of the executive branch of the U.S. Government.
They  are  executed  continuously  with  the  intent  to  enhance  international  legitimacy  and  gain  multinational  cooperation  in  support  of  defined  national  strategic  and  strategic  military  objectives.
They  are  designed  to  ensure  success  by  shaping perceptions and influencing the behavior of both adversaries and  partner nations, developing partner nation and friendly military capabilities  for   self-defense   and   multinational   operations,   improving   information   5         exchange  and  intelligence  sharing,  and  providing  US  peacetime and contingency access.12     forces  with   Phase zero or shaping operations, to be effective, take a lot of coordination with   many different actors.
With the ambassador being the lead   representative of the United States in a partner nation with internal security problems,   he sets the ground rules that all DoD units operating within his country must follow.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) has the lead   on all development issues within any country and it is through the interaction between   the ambassador and USAID representatives with a partner nation’s government or   ministries that an MSRP is put together.
The Area of operations for the CJTF-HOA included   18 nations however, all of the Civil Affairs teams (CAT) operated in only six of those   nations to include, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and the Comoros   Islands.
Each country posed its own unique challenges, and had its own requirements   before the CJTF-HOA was granted access.
This military to military meet the definition found in Joint Publication 5-0:      7   Joint Operations planning, in that we were ?developing partner nation and friendly   military capabilities for self-defense and multinational operations?13    The other mission set involving the CJTF-HOA was that of civil-military   engagements and projects.
Rear Admiral Brian L. Losey, the   commander of the Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa, states in his Prism   article, Conflict Prevention in East Africa, the Indirect Approach, that civil-military   engagements involved more than just U.S. CAT’s but included partners, such as Non   Governmental Organizations, USAID, DoS, International Organizations,  as well and   ?focus on meeting basic human needs and on providing essential services through   development projects that build trust and confidence between host nation government,   military and populations vulnerable to the influence of extremist groups and their   ideology?14     USAID is the lead agency on any development projects that the CJTF-HOA Civil   Affairs Teams thought were justified or needed in any country.
When this   was all done, final coordination was done with USAID and the Embassy to ensure the   project fell within their MSRP guidelines and if so, they would intern coordinate with the   partner nation government to ensure it was needed and that the respective ministry   within the government could sustain the final project.
There were some instances   where additional approval was needed by the partner nations military to ensure   continues access to an area for the duration of the project.
Other then development and military to military projects, the CJTF-HOA also   conducted medical and veterinarian exercises in conjunction with partner nation medical   institutions to assist in developing their capacity to provide those services to their   populations.
As CJTF-HOA provided training in basic medical and veterinarian   services, to isolated civilian populations, we were giving the partner nation government   the opportunity to build trust and confidence with their populations, something that was   critical for the stability of the region, as many civilians who would be susceptible to   violent extremist groups propaganda, were in many instances felt that their government   didn’t care about them and as such they had no loyalty to their government.
Each country team had its own requirements for CAT to operate within their   countries, which mostly fell in line with their published MSRP.
However, due to the   specific military purpose and geographic locations of the CAT’s, there were some issue   between the State Department, DoD and Non-governmental organizations (NGO), that   continue to plague the CJTF-HOA till this day.
H. Allen Irish, in his paper titles ?Peace Corps with Guns:   Can the Military be a Tool of Development?
states that ?development activities are not a   core military competency, and that there is neither a need for nor a comparative   advantage to using military assets in that capacity.
states that ?American officers lack the strong mix of non-combat skills needed in   order to engage arrays of cultures and organizations.
?16     10         Deborah Avant states in her article ?Losing Control of the Profession through   Outsourcing?
Special Operations Forces (SOF) have been training foreign militaries  for a   long time and has proven to be a valued asset available to the DoD  when assisting   other nations in developing their security forces, not only in Africa, but in Iraq and   Afghanistan as well.
There needs to be consensus from all parties, that are now involved with   the national security of the United States, to include the State Department, the   Department of the Treasury, USAID, Department of Justice, Department of Energy,   Department of transportation, Department of Homeland Security, the Environmental   Protection Agency, the Department of Commerce and the Office of Director of National   Intelligence.
As the CJTF-HOA has proven, military forces   can be incorporated into the cultures of other agencies and can work successfully   towards meeting the national security objectives of the U.S.
As such, effective interagency   coordination and cooperation will be essential for the United States to meet its national   security objectives in the coming future.
Only time will tell if all parties can reach a   consensus as to the proper role of the military and how it can best be employed to meet   the national security challenges we will face in the future.
All one has to do is look at the   successes of the CJTF-HOA to see how effective non-traditional military mission can be   in furthering the national security objectives of the U.S. without firing a single shot.
The main critics of militaries being   involved in humanitarian operations comes from non-governmental organizations   (NGO).
Those principals are:   Humanity:  The  principle  of  humanity  requires  the  preservation  of  the  humanitarian nature of operations—i.e., to protect life and ease suffering.
Impartiality:   Impartiality   in   principle   requires   that   humanitarian   action  respond according to need, and without discrimination.
Neutrality:  The  principle  of  neutrality  requires  outside  actors  to  avoid  giving military or political advantage to any side over another.18    The above listed principals are pretty much straight forward, and give the   humanitarian assistance organization a large amount of neutrality when they are   distribute their assistance.
This is something that is essential for these organizations to   have to be effective in their efforts, without it there would be a degradation of their   physical security.
This is something that they are aware of; as   they use significant force protection measures to secure their immediate area and the   soldiers conducting the humanitarian operation.
Other then humanitarian assistance   after a natural disaster, the United States Government does not deploy its military   13                     forces just to help, but rather there must be something gained for the U.S. and its   national security or national interest.
De-militarization of the Military Mission   The issue associated with the de-militarizing of the military mission revolves   around the idea of the security assistance.
The basics premise for the security assistance is where DoD and   other interagency organizations work side by side to bring together all the elements of   our national power.
Security assistance is defined as:   Group  of  programs  authorized  by the  Foreign  Assistance  Act of  1961,  as  amended, and the Arms Export Control Act of 1976, as amended, or other  related  statutes  by  which  the  United  States  provides  defense  articles,  military training,  and  other  defense-related  services  by  grant,  loan,  credit,  or  cash  sales  in  furtherance  of  national  policies  and  objectives.
Security  assistance is an element of security cooperation funded and authorized by  Department    of    State    to    be    administered    by    Department    of  Defense/Defense Security Cooperation Agency.
20    Because of the nature of security assistance DoD has been involved heavily in   the defense related services not only in Iraq and Afghanistan, but other friendly nations   throughout the world.
Within the Quadrennial Roles and Missions Review Report, January   2009, irregular warfare is a core competencies and function of the Department of   Defense and will expand beyond its war fighting mission to include ?winning the support   of the relevant populations, promoting friendly political authority, and eroding adversary   control, influence and support?23     This can also be summed up as the core mission of   the CJTF-HOA and its execution of the 3-D whole of government paradigm.
With the man power   coming from the DoD, other agencies will need to adapt their internal cultures and   organizations to work along with the military in this new environment of cooperation and   coordination.
The biggest obstacles were identified by the United States Government   Accounting Office (GAO) in their testimony before the Subcommittee on National   Security and Foreign Affairs, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, House   of Representatives back in July of 2010.
The subject of their brief was national security,   interagency collaboration practices and challenges at DoD’s Southern and African   Commands.
Another issue that is proving to be a big challenge for the   military is the need for additional training to develop a ?well trained workforce.
However, the GAO   points out that DoD has dropped the ball on adequate training for military members in   how to work with U.S. Embassies as well as cultural training specific to the geographic   area the military is operating, Africa was named specifically, and additional language   training.
It is because of these shortfalls by the DoD that has led to ?a lack of   understanding of other agencies’ cultures, processes and core capabilities can hamper   U.S. national security partners ability to work together effectively.
?25   AFRICOM as well   as SOUTHCOM have been working diligently to correct this shortfall in training of its   staffs on interagency cultures and cooperation, and a more standardized training   program should be forthcoming in the near future.
As we have seen in the implications for the military, other U.S. government   agencies are grossly under manned and resourced to meet the national security threats   of today.
Agencies will have to begin restructuring their organizations to adequately man   any positions that are available within a geographic combatant commands staff, as well   as take the lead on training all DoD personnel on their agencies cultures and operations   and how best to integrate DoD manpower effectively into their organizations to secure      17   unity of efforts.
for security cooperation to   be successful within the interagency, as suggested by Randal Walsh in his,?
Security   Cooperation and New Functional Command.
?26  In his article Walsh states that   USSOCOM would be the best choice for creating a functional combatant command   dedicated to security assistance, which involves coordination within and between   agencies within the U.S. Government.
I will concur that there does need to be a central   coordination authority for the way forward, and It would be the most practical use of our   military forces if there was a military lead in the coordinating efforts, as they would make   up the majority of the work force employed to counter the new security threats, and they   have the man power and equipment to rapidly employ to meet any challenge.
Conclusion   This paper has shown how the need for interagency cooperation and   coordination are paramount for the United States to meet its national security as well as   its foreign policy objectives.
We will need to rethink our current thoughts on the use of military forces, and may   have to stand down our obsolete fighting force and reorganize it into a new construct   that is adaptable and able to work alongside all of the inter-agencies within the U.S.   Government.
Endnotes   1  National Security Council.
Mapping the Global Future; Report of the National Security   Council 2020 project.
(Washington D.C: National Security Council, 2004),14   2 Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (New York, Anchor books, April   2000) P. IX.
3  Ibid., 13   4  Ibid., 13-14   5  Derek S. Reveron, Exporting Security.
P.18   6  Ibid., 18   7  Paul J. Smith, Transnational Security Threats and State Survival: A Role for the Military,   Parameters (Autumn 2000): 78   8 White house, National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, DC: White   House, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010.)
9  Liana Sun Wyler, Weak and Failing States: Evolving Security Threats and U.S. Policy   (Washington D.C: Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, 2008), 1   10 White house, National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, DC: White   House, May 2010.)
Peace Corps with Guns: Can the Military be a Tool of Development.
?Losing Control of the Profession through Outsourcing?
P5   24  GAO, National Security Interagency collaboration practices and challenges at DOD’s   Southern and Africa Commands, July 12, 2010.
2   25  Ibid., 3   26 Walsh, Randal M. Security Cooperation A New Functional Command.
(1st Quarter 2012): 52            Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   Piret Pernik and Emmet Tuohy  International Centre for Defence Studies   Toom-Rüütli 12-6, Tallinn 10130,    ESTONIA   Piret.Pernik@icds.ee    ABSTRACT   As Estonia saw in 2007 cyber attacks on a nationwide scale can affect the whole of society, both public and  private  sectors  alike.
Accordingly,  addressing the  consequences  of  such  attacks and to  preventing future  incidents-  requires  a  comprehensive  approach  involving  coordination  both  within  different  government  institutions and among commercial organisations such as telecommunications companies, internet service  providers, etc.
This paper is intended to illustrate the practice of interagency cooperation in Estonia in the  field of cyber security.
The  main  part  of  the  paper  examines  how  nationwide  and  international  cyber  exercises  have  improved  interagency cooperation.
1.0  INTRODUCTION  The cross-border nature of cyberspace renders cyber security a relevant issue for international and national  security  &  defence  actors.
Cyber  risks  endanger  everyone  –  individuals,  businesses,  national  and  international  organisations,  governments,  and  militaries.
The  prevention  and  mitigation  of  cyber  threats  requires collaboration of all actors; in other words, a truly comprehensive approach across the individual,  team, organizational, national, and international levels is needed.
When the integrity of networks, critical  infrastructures and industrial control systems is at risk, acting alone pays no dividends (ENISA 2013: 13).
That greater cooperation at all levels is needed to ensure cyber security has been acknowledged by the EU,  which from 2014 has started  pan-European cyber exercises that will test technical, operational, and political  level cooperation procedures and responses in preventing and mitigating cyber incidences (Ibid.
Many entities (governments, militaries, and international organisations) have launched policies and strategies  to prevent and to respond to cyber incidents.
Cyber  exercises  and  training  constitute  an  essential  ingredient  for  successful interagency cooperation in addition to planning, information sharing and personal relationships.
Cyber exercises make a good test ground for the implementation of the comprehensive approach to crisis  management, a concept explained in more detail below.
This  paper  identifies  conditions  for  successful  interactions  in  conducting  cross-sector  cyber  exercises.
It  reviews the literature on comprehensive approach in emergency and crisis management and identifies key  requirements relevant to the conduct of exercises.
It then considers the experience of Estonia in coordination  of  national  cyber  security  efforts  and  investigates  lessons  learned  from  its  experience  organizing  and  participating  it  concludes  with  recommendations to policymakers on the use of cyber exercises as a tool for strengthening the collaboration  that is essential for ensuring cyber security.
international  cyber  security  exercises.
Finally,   in  national  and   STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 1      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            This research applies qualitative methods (analysis of legal acts, institutional set-up, and after action reports;  as well as semi-structured interviews with subject matter experts).
It brings together a variety of government departments, non- governmental  organizations,  first  responders,  members  of  the  private  sector,  and  members  of  local  communities  working  together  to  meet  an  overarching  mission  goal  (Essens  et  al.
The implementation of CA has been the  responsibility of NATO member states rather than the Alliance itself; accordingly, national conceptions have  prevailed  over  the  theoretical  NATO  approach.
CA  is  regarded  a  common  and  shared  responsibility  of  all  EU  actors,  including  member  states.
In spite of this rhetoric, CA is still an idea under development rather than a  reality in EU security affairs (Smith 2013).
What is more, there is a discrepancy between rhetoric on CA and  actual practice; the EU has thus far been unsuccessful in developing the concept in crisis response planning  (Mattelaer 2013).
In regards to NATO member states, President Obama’s administration calls the integration of tools a ‘whole-  of government’ approach that requires ‘a deliberate and inclusive interagency process, so that we achieve  integration of our efforts to implement and monitor operations, policies and strategies’ (White House 2010:  14).2  Some  other  NATO  member  states  (UK,  Canada,  Norway  and  Denmark)  have  developed  CA  on  a  national scale, while France, Germany and most Southern and Easter European members states have made  little progress in implementing it (Tardy 2013: 108).
[1]  2010  NATO’s  Strategic  Concept  stresses  that  ‘a  comprehensive  political,  civilian  and  military  approach  is  necessary  for  effective  crisis  management.
The  Alliance  will  engage  actively  with  other  international actors before, during and after crises to encourage collaborative analysis, planning and conduct  of activities on the ground, in order to maximise coherence and effectiveness of the overall international  effort.’  (NATO  2010).
9 - 2   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   CA has been mainly used  in crisis response, stabilisation, peacebuilding, and other out-of-area-operations,  while at domestic level interagency cooperation and ‘total defence’ have been utilized more frequently.
The  common denominator of out-of-area & domestic operations is that they involve multiple actors and combine  many dimensions (political, military, technological, informational, human, environmental, economic, etc.)
In  the  future,  highly  complex,  smaller-scale,  and  collaborative  operations  are  likely  to  become  an  international  norm;  meanwhile,  at  the  domestic  level,  crises  and  national  emergencies  will  necessitate  effective collaboration among the joint, interagency, and public spheres (Essens et al.
Since the  nature of cyber risks requires a multilevel and multi-stakeholder structure to detect the risks and meet cyber  challenges, CA is relevant in this domain as well.
Cyber attacks may originate anywhere in the world, with  their source often difficult or impossible to identify.
Cross-border cyber risks erode or eliminate traditional  distinctions  between  homeland  security  and  military  defence,  and between  public  authorities  and  private  enterprise (Bendiek and Porter 2013: 166).
Hence  a  response  to  cyber  attacks  requires  cross-sector  and  cross-border cooperation among all actors.
Cyber  security  that  encompasses many  social  domains  (diplomatic,  political,  military,  economic,  internal  security and so on) requires a truly comprehensive approach to crisis management.
In order to keep ahead of  impending  threats,  private  sector  collaboration  and  public-private  information  sharing  are  urgent  requirements (Rendon Group 2011: iii).
There is a broad consensus among experts that cyber exercises help  to enhance the preparedness, responsiveness and knowledge of stakeholders in responding to cyber incidents  (ENISA  2012).
Thus,  cyber  exercises  work  simultaneously  to  strengthen  cyber  security  and  enhance  implementation of CA.
1.2  Key CA requirements   Pivotal  factors  determining  the  effectiveness  of  CA  are  tradition  and  culture.
A  common  culture  underpinning  effective  CA  includes  shared  terminology  and  multiagency  institutions.
It  can  be  generated  through three elements: education and training, the secondment of personnel, and the creation of joint units  and  partnerships  among  organizations  (Menhinick  and  Gregory  2011:  166).
‘Cultural’  interoperability  among  organisations  stems  from  interagency  understanding,  trust,  and  confidence  that  require  close  and  ongoing  training,  liaisons,  and  exchanges,  which  are  delivered  by  shared  learning  and  education  (Floyd  2009:  11).
Exercises  and  training  work  as  bricks  in  building  a  common  interoperable  culture,  the  basic  foundation of CA.
Most  people  agree  that  other  fundamental  conditions for  successful  interagency  cooperation  are  personal  relationships,  information  sharing,  planning,  and  exercises.
Information  sharing  -  which  can  range  from  episodic  to  more  structured  and  formalised  -  is  essential  for  successful  CA  as  well  as  for  coordinated  interagency planning (Stickler 2010: 6).
While people practice cooperation when taking part in exercises,  they also form and nurture relationships, share information, and (in the role of planners) engage in collective  planning, all of which are elements that are rehearsed during exercises.
They should also have real opportunities to actually work together in exercises that  are  intended  to  immerse  them  in  an  environment  similar  to  that  which  they  would  face  together  in  operations’ (Ibid : 260).
STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 3      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            Solution approaches in implementing CA: training and exercises    1.2  Many challenges that hinder collaboration in comprehensive environments have been identified by previous  studies.
They include disparate mandates, goals, opinions, ideas, organisational cultures, operational styles,  and oversight mechanisms.
Furthermore,  an  effort  to  coordinate  different  actors  requires  financial  and  human resources and capacity, and these are often underestimated or overlooked (Essens et al.
It  is  difficult  to  transfer  the  practice  of  large-  scale  military  training  to  the  CA  context  because  civilian  agencies have fewer staff (and are unable to leave their desks unattended to participate in joint exercises) and  because they do not attribute the same value to large-scale standardised and repetitive exercising within their  organisations  (Baumann  2012:  7).
Thus it is  logical that the extent and nature of interagency exercises to practice complex operations involving multiple  agencies  are  often  very  limited  (Stickler  2010:  8).
Against  this  backdrop,  cyber  exercises  -  whether  multilateral,  bilateral,  or  domestic  -  provide  a  testing  ground for practising CA  because the main part of  society’s critical services depend on security of  ICT.
Since many ICT networks are interdependent - they depend on other national and international services and  networks  -  an  effective  response  to  a  cyber  incident  is  not  possible  without  full  scale  national  and  international cooperation.3    Exercises work as tools for leveraging personal relationships that will be useful for responding to a real- world  crisis.
When  military  and  civilian  officials  are  immersed  in  an  interagency  environment  in  which  solutions are developed by teams, it results in the establishment of relationships among individuals from all  partner agencies that will prove extremely beneficial in future real-word situations.
Thus,  we  conclude  that  practising  interagency  cooperation  during  cyber  exercises  helps  to  build  CA  conditions that enable and facilitate cooperation at the team, organisational, national, and international levels.
Cyber  exercises  that  reinforce  many  of  these  elements  will  immerse  individuals  into  a  CA  mindset.
Participation in international exercises supports national competence and practices, reinforces the creation of                                                          [3]  In Estonia 99.6% of banking transactions are done electronically.
Public and commercial e-services  depend on the functioning of ICT systems and the availability of electricity, including from cross-border  critical infrastructures.
Vital service means a service that is essential for the maintenance of the  society, and the health, safety, security, economic or social well-being of people.
9 - 4   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   an international network of experts, and provides a reference point to test national preparedness, strengths,  and weaknesses.
2.0  INSTITUTIONAL SETUP OF CYBER SECURITY IN ESTONIA  According to the Estonian Cyber Security Strategy 2008-2013, an advisory body of the government - the  Cyber Security Council of the National Security Committee of the Government, founded in 2009 - assesses  progress  in  implementing  the  strategy,  while  the  Government  endorses  the  strategy  and  implementation  plans.
The  Cyber  Security  Council  is  headed  by  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Communications,  and  its  members  are  representatives  from  seven  ministries,  government  agencies  within  their  areas  of  responsibility,  the  Government  Office,  and  the  Estonian  Defence  Forces.4  Based on need, the meetings can be extended to include private sector, academic, and research institutions.
The Council is served by an expert-level interagency coordination group that meets regularly.
The  key  government  agencies  responsible  for  implementing  the  national  strategy  are  the  Ministry  of  Economic Affairs and Communications, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of  Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Education and Science.
•  The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications ensures the continuous operation of vital  services, and coordinates ICT and state IT-policy actions and development plans in the field of state  administrative  information  systems.
It  coordinates  the  implementation  of  the  Cyber  Security  Strategy 2008-2013 and 2014-2017 (including the drafting of the strategy for the period 2014-2017)  and the Development Plan of Information Society 2020.
A subdivision of the ministry, the Estonian  Information  System’s  Authority  (RIA5)  coordinates  the  development  and  administration  of  the  state’s information system, organises activities related to information security, and handles security  incidents  that  occur  in  national  computer  networks.
•  The  Ministry  of  Defence  and  its  subordinate  entities,  the  Estonian  Defence  Forces,  the  Defence  League,  and  the  Information  Board  (external  intelligence  service)  are  responsible  for  military  aspects of cyber defence.
•  The Ministry of the Interior is responsible for crisis management and coordinates the operation of  vital  services.
Its  subordinate  agencies  -  the  Police  and  Border  Guard Board  and  the  Internal  Security  Service  –  handle  cyber  security  in the  fields of law enforcement (cyber crime and terrorism).
•  The Ministry of Justice and its subordinate Prosecutor’s Office enforce the laws concerning cyber   crimes.
•  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for Estonian cyber security activities in international   organisations (the United Nations, International Telecommunication Union, etc.).
•  The  Government  Office  organises  the  operation  of  the  National  Security  Committee  of  the  Government, advises the Prime Minister on matters relating to national defence, and coordinates the  leadership of national security and national defence.
[5]      STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 5      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            The  National  Security  Committee  of the  Government  assesses  national  security  situation and  advises the  government  regarding  the  organisation  of  issues  concerning  national  defence.
It  assesses  progress  in  implementing the Cyber Security Strategy and implementation plans before the Government endorses them.
The advisory body of the Committee, the Cyber  Security Council, provides inter- agency  cooperation.
The  extended  format  of  the  Council  includes  also  private  sector  stakeholders.
The Council is served by an expert-level inter-agency coordination group.
A  subdivision  of  MEAC,  the  Estonian  Information  Systems  Authority,  coordinates  the  development  and  administration of the state’s information system.
The  Authority  encompasses  a  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  (CERT),  which  handles  security  incidents  that  occur  in  Estonian  computer  networks.
2.1  How cooperation is consolidated in Estonia   In Estonia cyber security is considered part of an integrated national defence that calls for a comprehensive  effort involving all sectors of national society (Ministry of Defence 2010).
The underlying principle of the  strategy is that cyber security shall be ensured through effective co-operation between the public and private  sectors and through the  co-ordinated efforts of all concerned stakeholders, including civil society.
In this  respect, as a small country Estonia has an edge over bigger countries – the small size of its cyber security  community  and  the  limited  number  of  state  authorities  responsible  for  ensuring  cyber  security  produce  favourable conditions for easier public-private cooperation.
As  people  know  each  other  personally,  they  tend  to  trust  others  more  than  in  impersonal interactions, and greater flexibility enables them to share information swiftly as cyber incidents  evolve very fast.
In Estonia, public-private cyber security cooperation among commercial, governmental and academic bodies  is well-established, spanning over nearly two decades (Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 7; 37).6 The response  to  cyber  attacks  against  Estonia  in  2007  was  coordinated  by  CERT,  a  structural  entity  of  RIA  that  is  responsible for the management of security incidents in national computer networks, with assistance from  experts from private and public sectors within and outside of the country.
A year before the attacks, a working group  was formed whose aim was to prepare the establishment of NATO CCD COE (Äripäev 2007).
Public and  private sector members of the working group formed an informal network of the cyber security community.
In the opinion of Hillar Aarelaid, then the head of CERT, Estonia’s weapon to combat cyber attacks against  national  networks  was  the  size  of  the  country  and  the  enthusiasm  of  Estonian  IT-specialists.
[6]  A  public-private  cooperation  intended  to  enhance  the  security  of  e-services  and  promote  public  awareness about protecting information systems was established in 2006 involving the Ministry of Economic  Affairs  and  Communications,  largest  telecoms,  commercial  banks  and  later  joined  by  the  largest  energy  supplier,  largest  governmental  e-service  providers  and  others  (Kaska,  Osula,  Stinissen  2013:  7).
Memorandum of Understanding for ‘Computer Security 2009.’   9 - 6   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   In 2007 the Estonian cyber security community as well as the Minister of Defence welcomed a proposal to  establish a Cyber Defence League along the lines of the existing Estonian Defence League, and shortly after  the proposal an informal cooperation network was initiated by the Estonian Defence League.
Cooperation  was  in  the  beginning  based  at  informal  cooperation  network  (called  by  one  interviewed  expert  a  ‘gentlemen’s club’).
A few years later, in 2009, the first territorial units were formed and in 2011 a Cyber  Defence Unit (CDU) was established by a legal act.7 In the early years the aim of the network was to share  technical  competence  and  information,  thereby  increasing  the  knowledge  and  skills  of  its  members.
The  network provided for its members the opportunity to consult each other.
It was expected that the aggregation  of expert know-how would result in ‘collective brain that works better than adversary’s’ (Padar 2014).
In addition to the CDU’s unique cooperation model that brings together public and private sectors as well as  the civilian and military spheres, RIA has played a major role in maintaining close relationships with private  sector,  including  critical  infrastructure  owners.
Since  the  establishment  of  RIA  in  2011  comprehensive  approach in domestic cyber security cooperation has significantly improved.
RIA has initiated a number of  informal, subject-matter-specific cooperation networks to facilitate smooth cooperation between public and  private actors.
These partially overlapping informal networks enable actors to share information on their area  of expertise.
Some examples are regular meetings and e-mail list exchanges for information security chiefs  from government agencies, a CERT-network with members from public and private sectors, a Committee for  the Protection of Critical Information Infrastructure, and a network for ISKE8 experts.
According to one expert interviewed  for the present analysis, even as late as 2010 some government agencies believed that cyber incident would  not concern them, but today all actors realise that their involvement is necessary to ensure cyber security.
Close personal relationships among cyber security community enable and facilitate cooperation, and it is  believed  that  this  constitutes  an  advantage.
In 2002 a similar project, the Tiger University Program, was  created for universities.9 In 2009 a public-private awareness raising program known as Computer Security  2009  was  launched,  and  a Memorandum  of  Understanding  for  the establishment  of  an  IT  Academy  was  signed in 2009; it began operation in 2012.
More recent years examples include the Smart Labs in 2012 and  Raising Awareness of the Safe Use of Mobile Phones in 2013 campaigns.
2.2  Cyber Defence Unit of the Estonian Defence League   The  CDU  has  refined  earlier  looser  consultation  and  cooperation  models  into  an  advanced  collaboration  system  that  could  be  applied  in  other  countries  to  strengthen  cooperation  among  volunteers.
The  model  enables to create a cooperative network to combine expertise from public and private sectors to facilitate the  response to a cyber crisis.
[8]   State agencies ensure information security through the three-level baseline security system, ISKE.
information   see   http://www.itcollege.ee/en/it-college/foundation-  STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 7      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            protecting  information  infrastructure  and  supporting  the  broader  objectives  of  national  defence’ (Defence  League 2014).
The objectives of the unit are to develop a cooperation network of cyber experts, strengthen  the security of critical information infrastructure, and promote cyber security awareness.
The CDU works to  ensure  the  secure  functioning  of  national  information  infrastructure,  enhance  national  cyber  security  cooperation, and strengthen cyber defence support capabilities that can be provided in time of crisis.
The unit  participates in training and education with the aim of improving the knowledge and skills of its members as  well as of increasing cyber awareness and cyber security among the population as a whole.
Today the CDU aims to work as a reserve resource pool of well-trained IT specialists who can be deployed  to manage domestic crises to assist in the protection of critical infrastructure both in the public and private  sectors.
identify which skills are required and designate accordingly individuals with  specific IT-profile to enterprises).
While the CDU seeks to provide a training platform for its members, in  promoting cyber security awareness its approach is targeted  more broadly (Padar 2014).
It offers regular  training and exercise opportunities for its members, organises and participates in national and international  exercises,  and  holds  seminars  for  government  institutions  (Kaska,  Osula,  Stinissen  2013:  22).
Formal  cooperation agreement is place with NATO CCD COE; and a joint Protocol for Intention with RIA and other  cyber  security  actors  has  been  signed.
At  international  level  the  unit  cooperates  with  the  US  Maryland  National Guard by, inter alia, mutual participation in cyber exercises (Estonian Defence League 2013).
It  is  worth  noting  that  key  public  and  private  cyber  security  community  actors  (including  the  top  management of enterprises and of government agencies) belong to the CDU; this overlap facilitates the swift  flow of new creative ideas between the subject- matter expert and management levels of public and private  sector bodies.
According to a draft legal act (Ministry of Defence 2013), the CDU can be charged by a competent agency  (RIA, the Ministry of Defence and agencies under its authority) with ensuring cyber security and providing  assistance to specific government institutions, critical infrastructure owners, and in some cases also to other  organisations.
The  tasks  of  the  unit  in  such  cases  could  include  penetration  testing,  response  to  cyber  incidents, and monitoring & analysis of digital data, as well as analysis of malware, spyware and viruses  (Ibid.).
Apart from a rapid response and reserve role of the CCDU in case of cyber incidents, the unit also  works closely with RIA in its everyday operation.
As discussed above, the CDU has grown out of informal coordination and cooperation network in which  most  members  knew  each  other  personally,  thereby  functioning  as  a  building  block  for  trust.
Evidently,  private  sector  cyber  security  community  relies  on  trust  mechanisms  to  ensure  their  data  and  ideas  are  guarded (Rendon Group 2011: 36).
By participating in training and exercises and providing assistance to  governmental  bodies  and  critical  infrastructure  owners  the  CDU  creates  the  informal  communication  channels  and  relationships  of  trust  that  are  central  to  effective  cooperation  in  the  case  of  a  major  cyber  incident (Kaska, Osula, Stinissen 2013: 27).
Similarly, the Estonian cyber security experts interviewed for  this paper believe that good cooperation is primarily based on close personal relationships, a shared feeling  of community, enthusiasm, and willingness of individual members to cooperate.
9 - 8   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   2.3  National and international exercises in 2010-2013   Since  2010  Estonia  has  conducted  and  participated  in  15  national  and  international  interagency  cyber  exercises.
The planning of future exercises is based on the principle of integrating national and international  level cyber crisis regulation exercises to use financial and human resources more efficiently.
At the national  level, the cyber component is integrated into existing military and civil crisis management exercises.
The  principal national level coordinator of cyber exercises is RIA.
Since 2010 three national exercises have been conducted with whole-of-government participation: first, the  CDU organised Cyber Hedgehog to test and train for the use of the e-voting system; also in 2010, a table-top  crisis management exercise for the protection of critical infrastructure called Tallinn CIIP was organised the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Communications.
Third,  in  2012  a  table-top  strategic  level  decision  making exercise of responding to a cyber incident known as Cyber Fever, was organised by the CDU.
The  private sector was engaged in the planning of Cyber Fever, and participated in Tallinn CIIP.
In addition, the  CDU took part of the planning process of the international exercise Baltic Cyber Shield in 2010.
As early as  2009  the  CDU  was  an  observer  at  NATO’s  technical  level  exercise,  Cyber  Coalition,  where  it  has  participated annually since 2010.
In 2012 a cyber component organised by the CDU, was introduced to the  annual military exercise of the Estonian Defence Forces, Spring Storm.
At the international level, government institutions have participated at the EU/ENISA cyber exercise Cyber  Europe (2010 and 2012), and in a joint EU-US exercise Cyber Atlantic (2011).
In 2012 CERT participated at  the EU cyber exercise Eurospe.
RIA has since 2011 participated in the NATO’s annual technical exercise  Cyber Coalition, and starting from 2013 has also served as an Exercise Controller in the planning process.
The  private  sector  (in  this  case,  the  largest  telecommunications  companies  and  commercial  banks)  has  participated in international level exercises (Cyber Europe 2012), even if only in activities at the national  level.
The  private  sector  was  also  consulted  concerning  the  scenario  development  of  Cyber  Europe.
In  addition, commercial enterprises contributed to the planning process of Cyber Coalition in 2012 and in 2013.
An Estonian team comprised largely of private sector representatives participated at Locked Shields 2013, a  technical exercise  organised by the NATO CCD COE, (commercial banks, telecoms), while the CDU and  RIA were involved in the planning process (both helped to organise Locked Shields the  in the previous year  as well).10    In  2013,  for  the  first  time  Estonia  hosted  Cyber  Coalition  -  the  largest  exercise  of  its  kind  in  terms  of  participating  countries.
For the first time in a NATO exercise, an Exercise Controller came from the  civilian side (RIA), a fact that  was regarded by experts as useful practice, as  civilian involvement in the  planning  and  execution  of  military  exercises  helps  transmit  knowledge  to  the  civilian  side.
It  was  also  regarded as a useful reference point, since the same official participated in the planning of EU exercises -  something that allows for the comparison and evaluation of best practices of both organisations.
As one put it, he would give an assessment of ‘a solid three plus on a scale of one to five’ of  the Estonian contribution to NATO crisis management exercises.
[10]  will also take place in 2014 and in 2015 Estonia will participate at Cyber Coalition.
Private sector will be engaged also in Cyber Europe 2014 exercise.
Annual exercise Locked Shield   STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 9      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            3.0  EVALUATION OF CYBER SECURITY EXERCISES11   3.1  Lessons identified relevant to enhancing interagency cooperation    Planning process   3.1.1  At the beginning of the planning process, it is important to establish points of contact in all national agencies  responsible  for  the  planning  of  an  exercise.
A  National  Exercise  Controller  must  attain  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  diverse  mandates,  responsibilities,  and  internal  work  procedures  of  the  participating  government agencies.
For example, at the beginning of planning for the EU exercise Cyber Europe 2014, the  principal national coordinator RIA engaged experts from the largest national electricity network operator.
The controller must make sure that - appropriate officials (from technical, operational, and strategic levels)  for a given scenario will be engaged, in order to eliminate the risks that the scenario would not match local  circumstances (legal framework, institutional setup, etc.).
Another important issue to be considered is that  national planning teams should include a range of necessary experts (e.g.
As Exercise Controller for international exercises, RIA shares information with other government agencies  as well as private and civil sector organisations, plans national-level activities originating from EU or NATO  scenarios, and coordinates the tailoring of these scenarios to local specifics.
These experts  then assess and evaluate aspects of the scenarios (for example in case of cyber events pertaining to critical  infrastructure, industrial control system experts).12 The planning process also identifies the lessons that to be  tested in the exercise.
If scenarios contain information about vulnerabilities, they should be classified.
It should also be ensured that  people involved in the planning process refrain from disclosing details about scenarios to their peers, as their  supervisors may pressure them to reveal such information in advance in order to improve their organisation’s  performance during the exercise.
Involving  more  actors  from  governmental  and  nongovernmental  organisations  in  the  planning  phase,  including any test runs, allows participants to harmonise divergent expectations and create a common culture  (including shared terminology).
This part of the paper is based on after action reports and interviews with government officials from   [12]  Industrial  Control  Systems  are  command  and  control  networks  and  systems  designed  to  support  industrial processes in such industries as gas and electricity distribution, water treatment, oil refining and  railways.
Industrial  control  systems  constitute  a  strategic  asset,  with  a  rising  potential  for  catastrophic  terrorist attacks affecting these critical infrastructures.
9 - 10   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   Execution    3.1.2  Interactions  and  teamwork  during  the  exercise  engender  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  strong  personal relationships.
Thus informal relationships should in  time be solidified into formal interagency agreements (e.g.
Memorandums of Understanding that describe  interagency information sharing, roles, responsibilities and tasks of actors, points of contact, etc.).
Evaluation    3.1.3  After  action  reports  are  completed  for  all  domestic  and  international  cyber  exercises.
In case of domestic exercises, an after action report  is  normally  distributed  to all  involved  parties,  while for  international  exercises  a  comprehensive  national  report is assembled by RIA and submitted to the EU and NATO.
A final consolidated EU or NATO report  that includes contributions from other member states is normally distributed only to main domestic actors.
A  further national distribution list will be composed according to a need-to-know basis - reports are sent to  actors whose duties require their knowledge of EU and NATO.
Concerning  lessons  identified  issues  that  require  immediate  action  or  urgent  improvement  (e.g.
if  the  leadership or decision making structures of agencies or the government, internal working procedures or legal  framework need to be altered) will normally be adopted.
Some legal acts have been amended in the past  years and further steps have been planned (updating a national response plan for a major cyber incident,  augmenting  a  list  of  vital  services).
While the slogan ‘don’t fix  what isn’t broken’ may in  some cases be justified given  limited financial and human resources to do the necessary spadework, in other  cases this unwillingness to implement improvements may be problematic, especially if the changes could  have prevented damage from happening.
For improved crisis preparation, it is crucial to develop feedback mechanisms to ensure that lessons will be  learned and implemented (ENISA 2012).
A remedy would be to design, in addition to generic after action  reports,  more  detailed  implementation  plans  that  will  identify  takeaway  tasks  and  deadlines,  as  well  as  organisations and individuals responsible for implementation in agencies.
Such implementation plans should  set  out  a  monitoring  process  for  future  progress.
This  has  been  done  in  the  CDU,  which  has  created  a  standardised format for after action reports that includes distinct domains (e.g.
amendments of legal acts and  work procedures, in public communication scheme, etc.
), different versions with appropriate levels of  detail  (for Exercise Controllers, domestic players, international partners, etc.
), and with different security levels  (for public use, classified).
The format includes also a requirement to conduct a hot wash-up (discussion by  participants conducted immediately after the exercise).
It is assumed that each agency will take the initiative to implement the takeaway tasks that concern them,  and thus a centralised monitoring system does not exist.
There is a need for greater formalisation, as the  implementation of lessons identified currently depends too much on the will of an individual.
STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 11      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            A related challenge is a need to feed lessons learned into national strategy and policy making processes.
It is  unfortunately common that individuals who participate in cyber exercises at the national, EU, and NATO  levels are often not the same officials responsible for formulating and implementing cyber security strategy,  and regular information sharing between these two groups is not systematic.
It is recommended that these  processes    be  synchronised  -  that  way,  exercises  and  training  will  match  the  ends,  means,  and  available   financial and human resources of the strategy; and takeaways from the exercises will be taken into account in  the review and implementation of the strategy.
Cyber  exercises  have  prompted    tests  of  other  crisis  response  capabilities.
In  2010 the  government-level  table-top  exercise  Cyber  Fever,  which  tested  the  decision  making  process  in  response  to  cyber  event,  provided the impetus for a regional-level crisis management exercise that involved the consequences of a  cyber incident.
Yet, a number of important lessons that require political or legislative action have yet to be implemented.
if the present composition of the Crisis Committee is optimal for cyber crisis  management;  how  information  is  shared  among  strategic  level  bodies  that  handle  security  and  crisis  management  -  the  Government  and  its  advisory  bodies,  the  Crisis  Committee  and  the  National  Security  Committee) should be discussed at the strategic and political levels.13    While there might be well-justified reasons for this lack of progress it may also be related to inertia and  desire to maintain the status quo that is intrinsic to bureaucracies in general.
3.2  Cross-cutting lessons learned    Interagency information sharing and joint crisis communication    3.2.1  International exercises have demonstrated that teams are willing to share information if they do not need to  consider  the  potential  negative  aspects  of  sharing,  such  as  legal  and  political  implications.
Since people attending the exercise get to know each other and develop trust, it is expected  that they will be more confident about sharing share information with their peers from the exercise teams in  the real world as well.
In regards to international cooperation, civilian agencies tend to favour civilian counterparts as their first  choice of partners, in the same way that militaries prefer to cooperate within military structures (i.e.
If a joint national response is required, this diverse choice of                                                         [13]  The Crisis Committee is headed by the Minister of the Interior.
It was suggested by one expert that  in  case  of  a  cyber  event  that  involves  the  area  of  responsibility  of  other  ministries,  respective  ministers  should lead the meeting of the Committee; currently other ministers are not members.
With regards to the  National Security Committee, the Minister of Economic Affairs and Communication is not a member of the  committee, though this is expected to change in the near future.
The National Security Committee endorses  the Cyber Security Strategy, while the Crisis Committee monitors and analyses the organisation of national  crisis management, including the assurance of the continuous operation of vital services.
9 - 12   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   partners may cause discrepancies in a coordinated national crisis response.
Therefore, Standard Operational  Procedures  should  determine  crisis  regulation  procedures  across  the  civilian  side  and  in  relation  to  civil- military interaction at the national level, including a crisis communication plan.
The plan with domestic  actors and with bilateral and multilateral partners outside the country should describe information-sharing  procedures  to  ensure  that  national  players  know  and  follow  them.14  Timely  information  flow  between  technical and strategic levels is a must.
It is crucial for the success of the exercise that both levels have  identical and timely information.
Therefore a crisis communication  plan for national cyber exercises should include the military side even if the scenario does not foresee a role  for the military in response to the crisis.
Concerning international exercises, there has to be a predetermined procedure about the sharing of national  information  with  international  players,  including  a  single  national  point  of  contact  to  whom  all  national  players are obliged to submit their feedback.
Conversely, this single national point of contact should distribute  information from EU/NATO bodies to other domestic players.
It  was  noted  by  the  Estonian  experts  consulted  for  this  paper  that  international  coordination  during  the  exercise  functions  well  between  agencies  that  are  used  to  working  together  daily  in  the  real  world,  e.g.,  national  CERTs.
This  implies  that  cooperation  routines  should  remain  the  same  during  daily  business,  exercises  and  the  real-world  cyber  incidents.
The  underlying  principle  of  inter-agency  cooperation  (that  applies also to information sharing) is that competences and working procedures should overlap as much as  possible  during  normal  conditions  and  emergency  situations  alike;  in  other  words,  authorities’  modus  operandi should be the same during emergencies as it is in normal conditions).
Another challenge in international exercises is intelligence sharing.
Key national players should have lawful  access to classified information during the exercise.
Intelligence agencies generally resist sharing exercise- related  intelligence  gained  from  international  partners  with  domestic  players  even  if  exercise  procedures  require it (in general, intelligence services tend to gather as much information as possible and share as little as  possible).
While there is no panacea, the situation could be improved - in addition to the efforts to create trust  - the loosening of normally rigid agency protocols that require information to flow first to the senior levels of  agencies  from  which  it  will  then  be  distributed  to  the  lower  levels  (Stickler  2010:  7).
Some classified information can be redacted  and made unclassified.
Commercial enterprises could be motivated to obtain security clearances if they have  the incentive of gaining classified government information that will help them to reduce business costs.
Some  NATO  member  states  have  established  public-private  fusion  centres  and  platforms  to  facilitate  greater  information and intelligence sharing, and have launched incentives for industries to encourage them to join.
However, business enterprises calculate their risks first and foremost from the standpoint of continuity and  profit; accordingly,  cyber risks that are deemed significant from governments’ viewpoint tend to have much  smaller value according to the  risk assessment scale of commercial organisations.
[14]  ENISA has developed a good practice guide to improve information sharing among CERT teams  that  could  be  used  as  guidance  to  develop  national  procedures  for  national  and  international  levels  information  sharing.
See  more  in  Cybersecurity  Cooperation.
STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 13         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model         Coordination  committees  that  enable  timely  information  exchange  should  be  established  at  all  levels  (technical,  operational/tactical,  strategic).
an organized mailing list, data sharing hierarchy, real-time chat room, a wiki15, a  voice communication system), however these forums shall not be flooded with too much information.16 It is  recommended  utilize  an  infrastructure  with  a  central  set  of  resources  that  enables  clear  and  effective  communication (Rendon Group 2011: iv).
To be able to develop and execute realistic scenarios, planners in  particular  must  have  a  clear  understanding  of  the  crisis  management  structures  and  decision-  making  procedures across all agencies and at all decision-making levels.
The engagement of participants    3.2.2  Public-private  partnerships  during  cyber  exercises  are  essential  due  to  private-sector  ownership  of  most  critical  information  infrastructure.
In  pan-European  cyber  exercises  public-private  cooperation  should  be  intensified  (technical,  operational/tactical, strategic) necessary cooperation models can be developed.
By   levels   The interviewed  Estonian experts  believed  that  voluntary  contribution  to  cyber  security  in the  country  is  primarily  based  on  the  goodwill  and  enthusiasm  of  individuals.
Presently,  incentives  offered  to  CDU  members are attractive training opportunities, possibility to gain new information and share experiences, and  being part of a ‘community feeling’.17    The experts stressed that voluntary participation should not be ‘over-exploited’ in government’s attempt to  reduce  costs  by  utilizing  an  unpaid  workforce.
Further  incentives  include  various  informal  social  networking events, support to families of the volunteers, access to classified information, and others.
[16]  In  the  context  of  collaborative  defence,  high-volume  detailed  information  is  harder  to  share  and  utilize.
[17]  However, the use of CDU members in the exercises and crisis response may be inhibited due to their  day-to-day professional jobs in other organisations; it is thus important that their employers support their  work.
9 - 14   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   at exercise, especially if the real-world relevance of the scenario is not clearly apparent.
18 When cabinet  members or senior officials are replaced by junior officials or technical level experts, there is a risk that the  exercise will not accurately practice real-world procedures.
It is also essential that information from technical  level be ‘translated’ into comprehensible conceptions and terminology for political-level officials (so as not,  as  put  by  the  interviewed  Estonian  expert,  to  use  the  ‘language  of  butterflies’).
With regards to international exercises, senior national players should not be replaced by substitutes.
Since civilian and  military agencies in charge of cyber security are different in each country, some mismatch is inevitable (a  four-star general may be talking to a less-senior civilian official), but the establishment of national points of  contact would help to reduce surprises.
Finally, the EU and NATO should invite each other to observe cyber exercises.
Cyber crisis management is  likely to encompass both civilian and military aspects (partly because in some member states militaries have a  greater role in cyber security than civilian agencies).
As noted previously civilian crises may have military  consequences  as  military  networks  depend  on  privately-owned  critical  infrastructure,  and  since  a  civilian  emergency can easily escalate into a military crisis.
Ad-hoc operation vs formalised networks    3.2.3  Ad hoc and informal cooperation bestows many benefits.
Informal organisations can adapt more easily as the  nature of threats changes (Rendon Group 2011: 30).
Informal social networks allow stakeholders to connect  with  each  other  efficiently  with  trust  and  validation,  even  though  it  may  also  result  in  the  unintended  omission of other potential stakeholders from which the network can benefit (Ibid.
In  informal networks personality conflicts tend to be more pronounced, especially in an ad-hoc organization  with a minimally defined leadership (Ibid.
When  individuals  who  initiated  or  are  responsible  for  coordination  of  meetings  are  seconded  or  leave  their  current  positions,  meetings  tend  to  become less frequent as the group gradually fades from existence.
Some Estonian experts stressed that while informal community is fundamental for cooperation (and other  people  allege  that  it  is  the  best  cooperation  form  for  cyber  space),  from  a  national  security  viewpoint  it  should be structured into legislation and institutions so that the government has the right to require private  and  nonprofit  entities  to  fulfil  their  duties  in  case  of  crisis.
If  capabilities  are  voluntary  and  cooperation  formations largely informal, it is difficult to formulate a meaningful role for them in national security and  defence policies and strategies.
[18]  scarce at political level, they may reduce the possible consequences of a cyber incident.
Since understanding the implications of cyber risks assumes some technical- level knowledge that is   STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 15      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            Decision-making in response to cyber incidents    3.2.4  Even though internal decision making structures and processes to respond to cyber incidents are in place in  many agencies, since cyber events evolve fast and decisions are required immediately, action is often taken  outside  of  these  structures.
Formal  procedures  are  still  used,  but  primarily  for  the  purposes  of  crisis  communication and information sharing.
Again, to ensure flexible decision making and agile responses to an  incident, this practice may be better than following predetermined formal procedures.
Whether through formal or informal procedures, it is advisable that crisis decisions, be taken by those with a  good understanding of the nature of an incident, including its possible technical, legal, political, and other  implications.
Therefore, in some cases it may be feasible to delegate interagency decision making from a top  senior or management level to the next level below, while keeping the upper level well informed.
4.0  CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS  This paper has explored the challenges of inter-agency cooperation in the field of cyber security.
First, on the  basis of a literature review, it has identified requirements for successful interaction relevant to cyber security  communities.
The empirical  part  of  the  paper  investigated  the  practice  of  organising  and  participating  in  national and international cyber exercises in Estonia.
In comparison with other activity areas of integrated (previously called ‘total defence’) security and defence  in Estonia, cyber security cooperation is among the most advanced fields.19 Interactions and coordination  among  cyber  security  community  have  developed  from  cooperation  on  the  elementary  level  (personal  relationships,  limited  information  access,  and  unstructured  interagency  process)  to  coordination  at  the  intermediate level (organisational interagency relationships, actors willing to share information about future  plans,  and  organised  interagency  process)  (Stickler  2010:  7).
Personal  relationships have been institutionalised in terms of membership, information access is extensive, ends and  goals  of  the  CDU  reinforce  objectives  of  national  cyber  security  policy  and  of  individual  agencies,  and  interactions with other actors are systematic.
On the basis of the paper’s findings, it is recommended that interagency cooperation in cyber security be  regularly practiced in national, EU, and NATO exercises.
In addition, the following should be considered:   •  Through educational programmes and training, continue to raise awareness among cyber security  stakeholders (especially at the political and strategic levels) of the arrangements, mechanisms, and  measures needed to ensure effective cyber security collaboration.
•  Evaluate  management  structure  to  ensure  it  allows  for  optimal  decision-making  and  management  models during a cyber incident, while designing and reviewing agency and inter-agency contingency  plans to ensure adequate response to a cyber incident.
•  Clarify legal mandates, duties, responsibilities, and decision making procedures throughout the whole  spectrum of cyber incidences and crisis management (from normal conditions up to a cyber attack  equivalent to an armed conflict).
[19]  The activity areas of integrated national defence in Estonia are: military defence, civil support to  military  defence,  international  efforts,  ensuring  internal  security  and  sustainability  of  vital  services  and  psychological defence (National Defence Strategy 2010: 4).
9 - 16   STO-MP-HFM-236         Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   •  Develop exercise scenarios that include transition from civilian crisis to military in order to practice   civil-military cooperation, including decision making procedures.
•  Ensure that cyber exercises are followed by substantial after-action reports and implementation plans,  and  monitor  progress  towards  implementation.
Develop  feedback  mechanisms  for  ensuring  that  lessons  learned  are  distributed  to  all  actors  and  implemented,  and  monitor  progress.
Feedback  mechanisms  include  after  action  reports  as  well  as  empowerment  of  the  actors  to  allow  them  to  implement  the  changes.
•  Develop  and  update  Standard  Operating  Procedures  for  cooperation  governing  stakeholder  interactions  and  coordination  in  cyber  crisis  management.
Clarify  the  roles,  responsibilities,  authorities of actors, as well as the leadership arrangements for cyber security emergencies.
•  Prepare  and  execute  cyber  exercises  in  accordance  with  ends  and  means  of  the  Cyber  Security  Strategy,  and  subsequently  take,  lessons  learned  into  account  when  reviewing  strategy  and  contingency  plans.
National contingency plans should be developed and tested on a regular basis  through exercises.
•  Use exercise management (tools to support preparation, execution and evaluation), monitoring (real- time, periodic status reports), and evaluation tools (debriefing workshops, after action reports, hot  wash-up sessions).
•  Consider drafting political guidance for the arrangement of joint civilian-military crisis management   exercises and hold frequent and regular exercises.
Consider  the  establishment  of  a  joint  authority  that  plans  and  organises  joint  crisis  management  exercises to  respond  to  the  whole  spectrum  of  civilian  and  military  emergencies,  including  cyber  security.20 Such an authority could assemble lessons learned from exercises and real-world incidents,  preparing an annual report with recommendations to the government.
[20]  In  Finland  the  Security  and  Defence  Committee  directs  joint  exercises  of  the  government.
The  committee is responsible for monitoring and development of Finland’s Security Strategy for Society  that is based on comprehensive security concept and provides basis for crisis management (Resolution  of the Finnish Government 16.12.2010).
STO-MP-HFM-236      9 - 17   Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            REFERENCES  [1]   Armed Forces of the United States, Joint Publication 3-16.
13 July 2013.  https://www.fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/jp3-16.pdf   [2]   [3]   [4]   [5]   [6]   [7]   [8]   [9]   Äripäev,  Eestist  saab  NATO  kübersüda  (Estonia  will  become  NATO’s  cyber  heart).
18.05.2007.  http://leht.aripaev.ee/publicationimages/pdf/lehed/3589.pdf   Cambron-McCabe N., Preparation and development of school leaders: Implications for social justice  policies.
),  Capability  Development  in  Support  of  Comprehensive  Approaches  Transforming  International Civil-Military Interactions.
Center for Technology and National Security Policy, INSS,  December  2011.  http://www.ndu.edu/CTNSP/docUploaded/ITX2_Capability%20Development%20for%20CA.pdf   Cavanaugh  S.,  Baltic  Ghost:  Regional  Cyber  Defense  Cooperation  between  the  Baltic  States,  EUCOM  and  the  SPP,  EUCOM.
3,  no.3,  INSS,  2012.  http://  www.isn.ethz.ch/Digital- Library/Publications/Detail/?ots591=0c54e3b3-1e9c-be1e-2c24- a6a8c7060233&lng=en&id=143972   Bendiek  A.,  Porter  L.  A.,  European  Cyber  Security  Policy  within  a  Global  Multistakeholder  Structure, European Foreign Affairs Review 18, no.2 (2013): 155-180.
http://www.cior.net/News/2010/COMPREHENSIVE- APPROACH-%E2%80%A6--and-why-it-is-a-big-NATO.aspx   Doughty  R.O,  Erwin  R.M.,  Building  National  Security  through  Interagency  Cooperation:  Opportunities  and  Challenges.
Changing  Mindsets to Transform Security: Leader Development for an Unpredictable and Complex World.
Center for Technology and National Security Policy.
Essens,  P.J.M.D.,  Febbraro,  A.  R.,  Thompson  M.  M,  and  Baranski  J.V.,  Collaboration  in  a  Comprehensive  Approach  to  Operations:  Introduction,  in  Collaboration  in  a  Comprehensive  Approach  to  Operations:  Effective  Collaboration  in Joint,  Multinational,  Multiagency  Teams  and  Staffs, STO-MP-HFM-204, NATO Science and Technology Organization, October, 2013.
[10]   Essens, P.J.M.D., Febbraro, A. R., Thompson M. M, and Baranski J.V., Epilogue: Collaboration in  a  Comprehensive  Approach  to  Operations,  in  Collaboration  in  a  Comprehensive  Approach  to  Operations: Effective Collaboration in Joint, Multinational, Multiagency Teams and Staffs, STO- MP-HFM-204, NATO Science and Technology Organization, October, 2013.
9 - 18   STO-MP-HFM-236      [11]   [12]   [13]   [14]   [15]   [16]      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model   Estonian  Defence  League,  Küberkaitse  on  valdkond,  kus  Ameerika  Ühendriigid  õpivad  Eesti  kogemusest (Cyber Security is the field where the US learns from Estonian experience).
01.03.2013,  http://www.kaitseliit.ee/et/kindral-kiili-kuberkaitse-on-valdkond-kus-ameerika-uhendriigid-opivad- eesti-kogemusest   European Commission, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
European  Union  Agency  for  Network  and  Information  Security  (ENISA),  On  National  and  International  Cyber  exercises,  Survey,  Analysis  and  Recommendations.
October  2012.  http  http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cyber-crisis-cooperation/cce/cyber- exercises/exercise-survey2012   European  Union  Agency  for  Network  and  Information  Security  (ENISA),  Cybersecurity  Cooperation.
Finnish  Government,  Strategy  for  Security  in  Society.
Resolution  of  the  Finnish  Government  16.12.2010.  http://www.defmin.fi/en/publications/strategy_documents/the_security_strategy_for_society   Floyd N, How Defence can contribute to Australia’s national security strategy.
Lowry Institute for  International  Policy,  Sydney,  August,  2009.
),  Capability  Development  in  Support  of  Comprehensive  Approaches  Transforming International Civil-Military Interactions.
Center for Technology and National Security  Policy, INSS, December 2011.
[18]   Jermalavicius, T., Stakeholder Interactions in Comprehensive Security – Conditions for Success, in  Jermalavicius, T, Pernik, P, Hurt M with Breitenbauch H and Järvenpää P. Comprehensive Security  and  Integrated  Defence:  Challenges  of  implementing  whole-of-government  and  whole-of-society  approaches.
The Cyber Defence Unit of the Estonian Defence League -   Legal, Policy and Organisational Analysis.
[20]  Mattelaer, A., The Empty Promise of Comprehensive Planning in EU Crisis Management.
), Capability Development in Support of  Comprehensive  Approaches  Transforming  International  Civil-Military  Interactions.
Center  for  Technology and National Security Policy, INSS, December 2011.
STO-MP-HFM-236   9 - 19      Interagency Cooperation on Cyber Security: The Estonian Model            [22]  Ministry  of  Defence,  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  a  draft  regulation  on  the  Estonian  Defence  http://   engagement   02.04.2013.   security.
League  cyber  http://eelnoud.valitsus.ee/main#KBab1QqK    in   MOD,   [23]  Ministry  of  Defence   (MOD),  National  Defence  Strategy.
www.kaitseministeerium.ee/files/kmin/img/files/KM_riigikaitse_strateegia_eng(2).pdf    [24]  NATO,  Strategic  Concept:  For  the  Defence  and  Security  of  the  Members  of  the  North  Atlantic   Treaty Organisation, 2010.
Cyber Defence Exercise Locked Shields 2013 After Action Report.
Rendon Group, Conficker Working Group: Lessons Learned, June 2010, published January 2011.  http://www.confickerworkinggroup.org/wiki/uploads/Conficker_Working_Group_Lessons_Learned _17_June_2010_final.pdf   Riigikogu, Emergency Act (RT I 2009, 39, 262), 2009  http://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/530102013054/consolide    Smith M. E.,  Institutionalizing the ‘Comprehensive Approach’ to EU Security.
Weak conceptualisation, political divergences,  and implementation challenges.
Allience Strategy, Security and Global Governence.
[33]   Tikk,  E.,  Kaska  K.,  Vihul  L.,  International  Cyber  Incidents:  Legal  Considerations.
In: Neal D. J,  and Wells II L., Capability Development in Support of Comprehensive Approaches Transforming  International  Civil-Military  Interactions.
Center  for  Technology  and  National  Security  Policy,  INSS, December 2011   [35]  White House, National Security Strategy, May 2010.   http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/rss_viewer/national_security_strategy.pdf   9 - 20   STO-MP-HFM-236