April 4, 2017   Cybersecurity in the Health Care  Sector: Strengthening Public-Private  Partnerships   Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Energy and  Commerce, United States House of Representatives, One Hundred  Fifteenth Congress, First Session    HEARING CONTENTS:  Member Statements   Greg Walden  Chairman, Committee on Energy and Commerce  [View pdf]   Tim Murphy  Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations  [View pdf]   Witnesses   Denise Anderson  President, National Health Information Sharing and Analysis Center  [View pdf]   Michael McNeil  Global Product Security & Services Officer, Philips  [View pdf]   Terry Rice  Vice President, IT Risk Management & Chief Information Security Officer  Merck & Company, Inc.  [View pdf]   * Please Note: External links included in this compilation were functional at the time of its creation but are not maintained thereafter.
This hearing compilation was prepared by the Homeland Security Digital Library,   Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security.
Available Webcast(s)*:   [View Webcast]   Compiled From*:   https://energycommerce.house.gov/hearings-and-votes/hearings/cybersecurity- heath-care-sector-strengthening-public-private   * Please Note: External links included in this compilation were functional at the time of its creation but are not maintained thereafter.
This hearing compilation was prepared by the Homeland Security Digital Library,   Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security.
Opening Statement of Chairman Greg Walden  Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations    Hearing on “Cybersecurity in the Health Care Sector: Strengthening   Public-Private Partnerships”   April 4, 2017   	     (As prepared for delivery)   	     We are well aware of the threats posed by our increasingly connected  society, but nowhere do these risks hit closer to home than on the very  technology we rely on for our own health care.
The threats range from  ransomware, breaches of patient data at heath care organizations, to the  vulnerabilities in pacemakers and other medical devices.
Taken in  isolation, these and other threats pose serious challenges to health care  organizations.
Collectively, they demonstrate the breadth, complexity,  and unavoidable nature of cyber threats in modern society – both now  and for the foreseeable future.
As technology becomes increasingly integrated with all levels of our  health care, cyber threats pose a challenge to the entire sector.
Everyone  - from the smallest rural hospitals, to large providers and device  manufacturers - faces some level of exposure and risk.
Breaches, exploits, and vulnerabilities are inevitable realities of modern  society, even for the most well-resourced and sophisticated  organizations.
But this does not mean doom-and-gloom for everyone  with an internet connection.
It is simply reality and must serve as the  baseline for any discussion about cybersecurity.
Improving security is a collective responsibility.
When we work together  – government and private sector, large companies and small – we can do  more to improve security than if we attempt to solve it on our own.
An attack on one organization may be prevented elsewhere if we have  the infrastructure and mechanisms necessary to communicate effectively  with others across the sector.
That is why, for almost two decades, the U.S. has worked to establish  public-private partnerships to coordinate security planning and  information sharing within and across our 16 critical infrastructure  sectors, which includes health care.
Effective collaboration between government and the private sector is  vital to elevating our security posture,.
These partnerships provide a vital  link between those responsible for the safety and security of the nation  with those who own and operate the infrastructure critical to those  objectives.
The health  care sector, in particular, has struggled to coalesce around these public- private partnerships for cybersecurity.
As the threats continue to  escalate, so too do our cybersecurity challenges.
Opening Statement of The Honorable Tim Murphy   Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations   Hearing on “Cybersecurity in the Health Care Sector: Strengthening   Public-Private Partnerships”   April 4, 2017   We are here today to talk about cybersecurity in the health care sector.
Strong cybersecurity practices are essential in this industry.
This isn’t just about  protecting patient data or information – this is about patient safety.
For nearly two decades, a cornerstone of the nation’s efforts to combat cyber  threats have been public-private partnerships designed to facilitate engagement and  collaboration between the government and private sector.
Each sector is organized around several key  institutions – a Sector Specific Agency, Government Coordinating Council, Sector  Coordinating Council and Information Sharing and Analysis Center.
Some sectors have succeeded in  developing robust support and engagement with both government and industry  participants.
The gold standard, to date, has been the financial sector.
This   sector has improved collaboration and engagement – both with government  partners at the Department of Energy and across private industry – through senior  executive participation on the sector coordinating council.
In addition to elevating  the priority for industry partners, it has improved coordination and unity of effort  with the government.
What works for one sector may not work for  others.
As each sector figures out what works best for their participants, however,  the lessons from others should not be overlooked or ignored – especially for those  sectors that continue to evolve.
This sector has long struggled to coalesce around the public-private partnership  model, especially with respect to cybersecurity.
This may be partially attributable  to the fact that cybersecurity is a relatively new challenge for much of this sector.
However, as health care becomes increasingly digitized, the need to improve  cybersecurity must be a priority.
To start, health care is an incredibly  diverse and complex sector, with a wide range of industries and institutions of  varying sizes, technological sophistication, and resources.
It is also a sector where  cybersecurity often becomes conflated with privacy or compliance, complicating  the discussion.
small, rural health care institution – where cybersecurity falls to one employee who  is also responsible for managing IT systems and fixing copiers, among other duties  – what value do I get for the cost of joining the ISAC or listening to guidance from  the sector coordinating council?
Cybersecurity incidents   These challenges, however, must be overcome.
If I am a   can result in life or death situations if a medical device is hacked, or an attack shuts  down a hospital’s computer systems.
Cybersecurity is a collective responsibility  and that is why it is imperative that this sector find a way to come together to find  a sustainable path forward.
These are the folks working in the trenches and while the sector has shown signs of  progress, much work remains to be done.
I look forward to hearing more from our witnesses about the challenges of               Testimony of   Denise Anderson   On Behalf of the   The National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center and the   National Council of Information Sharing and Analysis Centers   Before the   United States House of Representatives   Committee on Energy and Commerce   Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations      April 4, 2017         Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        ISAC BACKGROUND    April 4, 2017   Chairman Murphy and members of the Subcommittee, my name is Denise Anderson.
I am   President of the National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center (NH-ISAC) and Chair   of the National Council of ISACs (NCI).
I want to thank you for this opportunity to address the   Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee about the industry perspective on cybersecurity and   information sharing as well as the importance of collaboration and coordination between the   public and private sectors.
ISACs were formed in response to the 1998 Presidential Decision Directive 63 (PDD 63), which   called for the public and private sectors to work together to address cyber threats to the nation’s   critical infrastructures.
After 9/11, in response to Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 (its   2013 successor, Presidential Policy Directive 21) and the Homeland Security Act, ISACs   expanded their role to encompass physical threats to their respective sectors.
ISACs are primarily trusted communities that promote the sharing of timely, actionable and   reliable information for their respective critical infrastructure sectors and provide forums for   owner and operator sharing around threats, incidents, vulnerabilities, best practices and   mitigation strategies.
ISACs are operational in nature and have strong reach into their sectors in   order to gather and disseminate information quickly and efficiently.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 2   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        NCI BACKGROUND    April 4, 2017   The NCI is a voluntary organization of ISACs formed in 2003 in recognition of the need for the   ISACs to share information with each other about common threats and issues.
The mission of the   NCI is to advance the physical and cyber security of critical infrastructure in North America by   establishing and maintaining a framework for valuable interaction among and between the   ISACs and with government.
There are currently 21 individual ISACs that represent their   respective critical infrastructure sectors or sub-sectors and 3 like organizations who are members   of the NCI.
The ISACs collaborate with each other daily through the NCI daily operations centers cyber call,   and the NCI listserver.
The organization is a true cross-sector partnership engaged   in sharing cyber and physical threats, mitigation strategies and working together and with   government partners during incidents requiring cross-sector response as well as addressing issues   affecting industry.
In addition, the NCI conducts and participates in cross-sector exercises, works   with the National Infrastructure Coordinating Center (NICC) and the National Cybersecurity and   Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) during steady-state and incidents, holds   emergency calls as needed and develops joint white papers around threats.
The ISACs have been   instrumental in embracing, developing and advancing the automatic exchange of data within   their memberships and across the ISACs, as well as with government as possible.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 3   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        ISACs AND GOVERNMENT PARTNERSHIPS     April 4, 2017   ISACs, which are not-for-profit organizations, work closely with various government agencies   including their respective Sector Specific Agencies (SSAs) where they exist, intelligence   agencies, law enforcement and state and local governments.
In partnership with the Department   of Homeland Security (DHS), several ISACs participate in the National Cybersecurity and   Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) watch floor.
ISAC representatives, cleared at the   Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) level, attend the daily briefs and   other NCCIC meetings to share information on threats, vulnerabilities, incidents, and potential or   known impacts to the critical infrastructure sectors.
Having ISACs on the floor has allowed for   effective collaboration on threats and incidents and there have been many examples of successful   information sharing.
The ISACs also serve as liaisons to the National Infrastructure Coordinating   Center (NICC) and play a vital role in incident response and collaboration under the Critical   Infrastructure Partner Annex to the Incident Management Plan.
Finally, it should be noted that the ISACs collaborate with their sector coordinating councils as   applicable and work with other critical infrastructure partners during steady state and incidents.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 4   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        NH-ISAC BACKGROUND    April 4, 2017   The NH-ISAC, founded in 2010, is a 501(c)6 nonprofit organization and is funded primarily by   its member firms through member dues.
Since 2010 the membership has expanded to over 200   organizations including healthcare delivery organizations (HDOs), pharmaceutical and medical   device manufacturers, retail pharmacy, laboratory and radiological, electronic medical record   providers and payers representing approximately one-third of the US Health and Public Health   GDP*.
The NH-ISAC is a global organization that has members in several different countries and   membership is growing rapidly.
Besides offering a trusted forum and community for sharing, the NH-ISAC offers a number of   other services such as workshops, two annual summits, webinars, a daily report, monthly   newsletter, white papers, special interest groups, a number of working groups and committees   and various technical tools for member sharing.
The   NH-ISAC was one of the first organizations to adopt STIX and TAXII, which are protocols for   automated indicator and intelligence sharing and fosters a robust member machine to machine   sharing environment.
*Based on the annual revenue of all NH-ISAC member organizations.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 5   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony            April 4, 2017   The NH-ISAC is also engaged in two ground-breaking initiatives.
Included in the initial suite of services is a third party risk assessment platform with over 80   questions tailored for healthcare organizations that will then be stored in an accessible database   for the benefit of participating members, a benchmarking offering, as well as a ‘shared security   operations center (SOC)’ program that will offer affordable services for malware analysis,   penetration testing, vulnerability scanning and incident response.
The second is the Medical Device Security Information Sharing Council that is advancing efforts   in the area of medical device security and safety.
Under a Memorandum of Understanding   between the NH-ISAC, the Medical Device Innovation, Safety and Security Consortium   (MDISS), and the FDA; a number of national initiatives are underway to improve the security   and safety of medical devices.
These include: (1) MD-VIPER launched early this year to support   the reporting of vulnerabilities and responsible medical device vulnerability disclosure per the   FDA post market guidance (2) the National Cyber Safety Network for Health Technology, which   leverages best public health practices to achieve national scale impact on patient safety and   critical infrastructure and (3) the Medical Device Risk Assessment Platform, funded by DHS   Cyber Security Division, a program for medical device assessments and threat intelligence with a   database that HDOs use to understand and secure devices in their environment.
Our programs   include collaborations with DHS ICS-CERT, FDA, NIST National Cybersecurity Center of   National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 6   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        Excellence, the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), manufacturers and    April 4, 2017   national hospital networks as well as many other stakeholders.
The group has already held two medical device security workshops this year   with many more scheduled and in February 2017, NH-ISAC and MDISS held an all-day medical   device cybersecurity symposium at HIMSS, an industry conference.
The FDA has been very forward leaning in the medical device security collaboration space and   the partnership with FDA, NH-ISAC and MDISS is a great example of how industry and   government can come together to address cybersecurity issues.
Some examples of this   public/private partnership include co-sponsoring of the FDA public workshop in January 2016,   co-presenting at the FDA webinar on the post market guidance this past January 2017, presenting   together at NH-ISAC Summits, and in particular, leveraging the NH-ISAC infrastructure for   medical device vulnerability information sharing to meet the ‘ISAO functionality’ as described   in FDA’s post market guidance, as a regulatory incentive.
THE UNIQUE NATURE OF HEALTH AND CYBER   Six years ago, ‘cyber’ and ‘healthcare’ were not even placed in the same sentence.
Today   because of the proliferation of advances in technology and the efficiencies of connecting devices   and data via the internet, the cyber threat surface in healthcare has ballooned and the threat actors   National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 7   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        have followed.
Sensitive patient information must   move between various medical providers, pharmacies, diagnostic facilities and payers to   facilitate proper patient care and history as well as payment for those services.
Many healthcare   facilities such as hospitals operate in environments that are accessible to the public.
Hospitals   employ tens of thousands of medical devices, many using outdated operating systems, and many   of which are connected to a network.
These devices are made by a variety of manufacturers with   various levels of security and patching protocols built in.
Coupled with a diverse base within the   sector, complex siloed departments, a lack of skilled cyber staff, a lack of cyber security   situational awareness, a lack of knowledge and training for the medical staff as well as the CEO   and Board level, and lack of cyber security strategy including a risk management approach, the   health and public health sector faces an enormous challenge.
Congress can help meet this challenge by focusing on four key areas:      National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 8   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        1-EDUCATION, RECOGNITION AND FACILITATION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF    April 4, 2017   INFORMATION SHARING   One of the greatest challenges for the NH-ISAC and all ISACs is the lack of awareness amongst   the critical infrastructure owners and operators, particularly the smaller owners and operators,   that the ISACs exist and are a valuable tool.
Numerous incidents have shown that effective   information sharing amongst robust trusted networks of members works in combatting cyber   threats.
This has been very effective in the financial sector where the United States   Department of the Treasury, the regulators and state agencies have been strongly encouraging   membership in the FS-ISAC as a best practice.
The SSAs indeed have a policy reference for this kind of advisory to their sector representatives:   the NIST Cybersecurity Framework.
This Framework, developed over the course of a year   collaboratively by government and private sector stakeholders, lays out a cyber risk management   framework linked to five core functions: identify, protect, detect, respond and recover.
Among   the functional categories identified as part of a mature cyber risk management strategy is external   communications and coordination around cyber security threats, response and best practices.
In   other words, membership in an ISAC or ISAO is an essential element of a successful cyber risk   management strategy.
Likewise, the most recent draft of the White House cybersecurity   National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 9   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        executive order calls for an assessment of how government can support critical sectors’ cyber    April 4, 2017   risk management programs.
Accordingly, one of our key recommendations in response to that   review would be a policy statement that provides explicit guidance to SSA’s and their sectors to   integrate into their cyber risk management and preparedness programs their participation in and   collaboration with these information sharing and incident response organizations where   applicable.
Another way to facilitate sharing and build robust communities is by providing financial   incentives through tax breaks or other means to critical infrastructure organizations that join their   respective ISACs.
2-PROTECT INFORMATION SHARING   Recently, the Automotive ISAC was served a non-party deposition subpoena to furnish all   documentation related to communications between the Auto ISAC and one of its members.
The concern with this subpoena however, is that if Courts were to allow broad sweeps for   information and using ISACs as “one-stop-shops” to accomplish it, such actions would   effectively kill information sharing and undermine Congress’ important information sharing   goals set forth by the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA) and the government’s   interest in promoting national security through the ISACs and public-private information sharing.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 10   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        The confidential information shared amongst the members of an ISAC should be considered    April 4, 2017   protected information and not subject to disclosure.
3-ELIMINATE THE CONFUSION BETWEEN THE TERMS ISAC AND ISAO   The Executive Order, Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing, signed   February 15, 2015 by President Obama is commendable in its intent to foster information   sharing.
Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) were first defined in the   Homeland Security Act of 2002.
Effectively ISACs were the original ISAOs and are the subject matter experts in   information sharing with a majority of ISACs having been in existence for over a decade.
Indeed, there is a need for many groups that may not fall in with the critical infrastructure sectors   such as legal and media and entertainment organizations, who are increasingly becoming targets   for cyber incidents and attacks, to share information.
The private sector is already organizing   efforts in this area and as an example; the FS-ISAC, working with the legal industry, formed the   Legal ISAO.
ISACs offer several vehicles to share effective   techniques and practices for preventing, detecting and managing cyber security risk that are often   un-conventional controls (definition: controls that are designed and implemented independent of   any risk framework, standard or regulatory guidance).
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 11   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        For example: enterprises can choose to obtain an intelligence feed to identify newly registered    April 4, 2017   domains and choose to drop all email originating from newly registered domains.
This information is not shared in   any other forum or event.
Another example is the focus put on the adoption of the use of   DMARC as a standard for improving trust in email and constraining the use of email for   phishing attacks.
These two examples have a material impact on improving industry resiliency and   these techniques, like many others, are indicative of the unique services an ISAC offers to its   members.
While the White House has noted that the EO seeks   to “not limit effective existing relationships that exist between the government and the private   sector” the EO and prominent coverage of ISAOs has led to much confusion within industry as   to the impacts to ISACs.
When the FDA in its post   market guidance for medical device security announced the need for manufacturers to participate   in an ISAO, confusion ensued.
The NH-ISAC is effectively serving as the ISAO and as   mentioned is doing a large ground-breaking body of work in the medical device arena with the   National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 12   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony        FDA, but the guidance by using the term ISAO resulted in sector stakeholders immediately    April 4, 2017   thinking some new organization needed to be created and has caused a lot of confusion that is   still being sorted out.
The White House, SSAs and other relevant   agencies need to call out, recognize and support the unique role ISACs play in critical   infrastructure protection and resilience and not apply the term ISAO as a blanket term for all   information sharing.
4-ESTABLISH CYBER SECURITY PROFESSIONALS AS SSA LIAISONS   Given that cyber security has only recently come to healthcare, it is understandable that there has   not been a need previously for a cyber security professional to act as a strong, government   liaison and advocate for the public private partnership when it comes to cyber matters.
It has   become increasingly apparent that industry needs a government representative who understands   cyber security issues, threats, vulnerabilities and impacts as well as the blended threats between   physical and cyber security.
Having an established, clear government ‘go to’ lead in this area is   imperative to strengthening the partnership and improving the overall cyber security posture of   the health and public health sector.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 13   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony            April 4, 2017   EFFECTIVE INFORMATION SHARING   It is important to note that the goal of information sharing is not to share information in and of   itself but to create situational awareness in order to inform risk based decisions as well as allow   operational components within owner/operation organizations that have direct actionable control   over the content they are sharing, to perform an action.
The focus needs to be on enhancing the   ability of operational groups to work closely with each other.
The ISACs are successful organizations with almost two decades of proven case studies of   information sharing and collaboration.
They are the subject matter experts on information   sharing.
For information sharing to be effective it must be:   ?
Industry Driven   ?
Recognizing ISACs and the unique operational role that they play in critical   infrastructure protection and resilience   National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 14   Cybersecurity, Information Sharing and Partnership     NH-ISAC Testimony          April 4, 2017   ?
Protecting information sharing by ensuring confidential data shared amongst members is   protected from disclosure   ?
Place strong, defined and permanent cyber security liaisons and leadership within the   SSAs to advocate the public private partnership when it comes to cyber matters.
Cyber   security liaisons and their leadership, should be experienced and certified cyber security   professionals.
National Council of ISACs and National Health Information Sharing & Analysis Center     Page 15                Michael C. McNeil, Philips   AdvaMed, the Advanced Medical Technology Association    Testimony      Energy & Commerce Committee, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations   “Cybersecurity in the Heath Care Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships.”      Tuesday, April 4, 2017     Thank you Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and members of the Committee for  the opportunity to testify today.
As the Global Product Security and Services Officer  at Philips, a leading healthcare technology company, my responsibility is to oversee efforts to  ensure that consistent repeatable cybersecurity processes are deployed throughout the  development and maintenance of products.
Philips is driving the convergence between  professional health systems and personal consumer technologies to seamlessly and securely  connect devices, data, systems and people across the entire health continuum, from the hospital  to the home.
AdvaMed is the world’s largest trade association representing medical technology  manufacturers.
AdvaMed member companies produce the medical devices, diagnostic products  and health information systems that are transforming health care through earlier disease  detection, less invasive procedures and more effective treatments.
Collectively, we are  committed to ensuring patient access to life-saving and life-enhancing devices and other  advanced medical technologies.
Let me first say a few words about Philips’ cybersecurity strategy.
Our strategy includes not just  staying on top of emerging software-based vulnerabilities and potential external threats while  anticipating how they might affect Philips products, it also includes collaborating with regulatory  agencies, industry partners,  and health care providers to close security loopholes.
This includes  participating in the Health Care Industry Cyber Security Task Force, under the auspices of the  Department of Health and Human Services.
Working with these organizations, we can understand how other industries have addressed  cybersecurity threats, identified challenges to health care environments, and provide health care  industry stakeholders guidance on preparing for, and responding to, cybersecurity threats.
Moreover, we can help develop effective and uniform application of practical, innovative  security technologies and methodologies that enhance the country’s ability to address current and  future computer and information security challenges.
We also work with health system partners like Augusta University Health, as part of visionary  public-private programs like the one created by Governor Nathan Deal in Georgia, to address the  cyber security challenges facing the US healthcare system.
We also actively participate in  industry groups like AdvaMed.
Overview of Medical Technology Sector and Cybersecurity    Let me now describe an overview of the medical technology sector and cybersecurity.
AdvaMed  and its member companies, are committed to a robust cybersecurity framework as part of the  development and postmarket management of medical technologies.
Medical device  manufacturers address cybersecurity throughout the product lifecycle, including during the  design, development, production, distribution, deployment, maintenance and disposal of the  device and associated data.
Similarly, manufacturers implement proactive measures to manage  medical device cybersecurity, including but not limited to routine device cyber maintenance,  assessing postmarket information, employing risk-based approaches to characterizing  vulnerabilities, and timely implementation of necessary actions.
Principles for Robust Medical Technology Cybersecurity    Working with my colleagues at AdvaMed, we have developed the following five foundational  principles for the management of medical device cybersecurity:      1.
Medical device development and security risk management     First, an effective cybersecurity risk management program should incorporate both premarket  and postmarket lifecycle phases and address cybersecurity from medical device conception to  disposal.
In addition, medical device security risks should be addressed through a risk  management process that is based on consensus-driven recognized standards and reference  documents.
This risk management process should include a process to monitor the ongoing  security of devices in use.
System-Level Security     Second, medical technology cybersecurity is a shared responsibility among all stakeholders  within the healthcare community.
Because systems are only as secure as their weakest point, all  elements of the system must be appropriately managed and secured.
Coordinated Disclosure      Third, medical device manufacturers should deploy a coordinated disclosure process that  provides a pathway for researchers and others to submit information, including potential  vulnerabilities, to the organization.
It is important to emphasize that  whenever potential vulnerabilities involving a medical device are discovered, these findings  should first be brought to the attention of the manufacturer and / or FDA for review, analysis,  and possible remediation.
Information Sharing           Fourth, to assist manufacturers in continuously managing their device’s cybersecurity throughout  the product’s lifecycle, industry should judiciously share threat and vulnerability information.
Consensus Standards, Regulatory Requirements, and Education     Finally, the development of cybersecurity-related consensus standards and regulations should be  accomplished collaboratively among regulators, medical device manufacturers, independent  security experts, academia, and health care delivery organizations.
We also believe the health  care industry should leverage the experiences and expertise of other critical infrastructure sectors  and government agencies, such as NIST.
Engagement with FDA and Public-Private Partnerships    I would also like to take this opportunity to commend the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  (“FDA” or “Agency”) for its proactive leadership role over medical device cybersecurity.
The  FDA has worked closely with the medical technology industry and the broader healthcare  ecosystem to ensure medical device cybersecurity is considered and addressed throughout all  stages of product design and use.
For example, in 2013, FDA released final guidance concerning  premarket cybersecurity-related issues device manufacturers must consider when designing a  connected medical device.
And most recently, in December 2016, FDA released final guidance  addressing the postmarket management of medical device cybersecurity.
Taken together, these  documents represent significant – and welcomed – achievements by the Agency to inform  manufacturers of their medical device cybersecurity obligations.
Moreover, the FDA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with the National  Health Information Sharing and Analysis Organization (“NH-ISAC”) and the Medical Device  Innovation, Safety and Security Consortium (“MDISS”) to promote cybersecurity information  sharing for medical devices.
These efforts have led to the creation of a medical device-specific  information sharing and analysis organization, which has recently launched a program called the  Medical Device Vulnerability Intelligence Program for Evaluation and Response, or MD- VIPER.
MD-VIPER provides a streamlined mechanism for medical device manufacturers to  submit and share information concerning cybersecurity-related issues, as well as other members  of the broader healthcare ecosystem.
In light of the FDA’s significant work and achievements to date, and the Agency’s staff ongoing  engagement with industry, we believe that the FDA serves as an example to all regulatory bodies  with respect to the type of interaction, collaboration, and guidance an agency should provide to  its regulated industry.
Conclusion    I want to underscore how critical it is to our industry that medical devices are safe for patients  and risks, including cybersecurity threats, are appropriately and safely managed.
Healthcare  technology companies, like Philips, take seriously the need to continuously assess the security of           their devices in a world where the risks, no matter how remote, evolve.
Manufacturers make  every effort to address cybersecurity throughout the product lifecycle, including during the  design, development, production, distribution, deployment, maintenance and disposal of the  device and associated data.
Similarly, manufacturers implement proactive measures to manage  medical device cybersecurity, including but not limited to routine device cyber maintenance,  assessing postmarket information, employing risk-based approaches to characterizing  vulnerabilities, and timely implementation of necessary actions.
We work very closely with the FDA and look forward to continuing to work with Congress and  the Administration to ensure that the medical technology industry maintains a collaborative  approach to cybersecurity and device safety.
Written Testimony of   Terence M. Rice   On Behalf of    Merck & Co., Inc.   Before the   United States House of Representatives   Committee on Energy and Commerce   Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations      April 4, 2017         Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships         INTRODUCTION   Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette, and Members of the Oversight and   Investigations Subcommittee, my name is Terry Rice.
I have been involved in healthcare   cybersecurity for more than fifteen years in a wide variety of roles including my current   assignment as the Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) at Merck &   Co., Inc.
I also participate in a number of public-private partnerships that are working to   improve cybersecurity across the healthcare sector.
These partnerships include the National   Health-Information Sharing and Analysis Center (NH-ISAC), the Healthcare Sector   Coordinating Council (SCC), the SAFE BioPharma Association, and the Healthcare Industry   Cybsecurity Task Force, the latter of which was created by the Cybersecurity Information   Sharing Act of 2015.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you on the topic of   cybersecurity in the healthcare industry and to discuss how public-private partnerships have   assisted and can do even more to address the complex challenges we are facing.
THE STATE OF HEALTHCARE CYBERSECURITY   Cybersecurity has rapidly become a top concern for governments and industries around   the world.
In just the last four years, cybersecurity has jumped from the fifteenth greatest risk   facing companies to the third highest risk in the Allianz Annual Risk Barometer, a global survey   that measures the sentiments of corporate risk professionals.i  Cybersecurity has also been listed   as a top concern by many national governments and has been included as a top risk in the US   Intelligence Community’s annual Worldwide Threat Assessment since at least 2013.ii  Nowhere   is the situation more acute than in the healthcare industry.
In just the last few years we have seen   over one hundred million health records exposed in a number of well-publicized security   breaches, we have observed cybersecurity researchers demonstrate how software vulnerabilities        Page 2   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships         in insulin pumps and pacemakers could be exploited to cause a lethal attack, and we have   witnessed entire hospitals in the United States and the United Kingdom shutting down for   periods of time to combat a ransomware infection on critical systems.
It is because of these   events and many others that IBM named the healthcare industry as the most attacked industry in   its 2016 IBM Cyber Security Intelligence Index.iii    Unfortunately, I believe the news stories and reports underrepresent the risk we are facing as   an industry.
The total number of cybersecurity incidents is significantly underreported.
Today,   organizations are only required to report cybersecurity incidents when a) personal health   information is breached, b) the incident directly impacts patient safety, or c) the loss of   information or disruption of service would be considered a financially material eventiv.
Organizations are unlikely to report security incidents if not required to do so given the   potential reputational harm that might occur.
breaches of personal health information) also create a narrow focus on   privacy protections for personal health information instead of considering the full   spectrum of impacts caused by healthcare cyber incidents.
The healthcare industry consists of many small to mid-sized businesses that lack the   capital and personnel to deal effectively with all but the most basic cybersecurity issues.
According to one statistic, more than 90% of firms in the healthcare services subsector   employ less than 100 people and about 70% of these firms employ less than 10   employees.v  To complicate this, the healthcare services and hospital subsectors have   some of the lowest profit margins across industry.vi  These two factors make it difficult        Page 3   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships   for these firms to acquire the advanced tools and services necessary to prevent, or at least   detect, sophisticated attacks.
These small to mid-sized firms often face the difficult   choice of investing in the latest cybersecurity tool or purchasing a crucial medical system.
Even if these entities are able to make the capital   investments required, they are almost always unable to acquire the talent necessary to   install, operate, and maintain these capabilities and develop a broader cybersecurity   program.
The portability of healthcare information increases the risk.
Unlike other industries, the   healthcare industry requires information to be shared among multiple companies to   provide patient care.
Primary care physicians must share data with specialists, specialists   must share data with labs, labs provide information to pharmacies and pharmaceutical   benefits managers, and all of them share subsets of this data with insurance companies.
To facilitate this information sharing, most of these entities interconnect their networks   and systems.
The   healthcare industry was somewhat of a laggard in the adoption of software services and   solutions.
The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health   (HITECH) provisions of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provided   both incentives and penalties to increase the adoption of electronic health records.
This   rapid adoption of electronic health record technology has spurred the development of new   software solutions and services that can create, input, and analyze patient health   information.
While these advances offer tremendous potential healthcare benefits and   Page 4               Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships          may help to reduce cost across the industry, we are rapidly increasing the cyber attack   surface in the healthcare sector.
The risk is exacerbated by the fact that software   developers have not yet come up with a way to prevent errors and mistakes in the   software they create.
Today we measure software   errors in the number of defects per thousand lines of code; many of medical applications   being developed contain millions if not tens of millions of lines of software code.
So we must   account for this with additional preventative and detective controls.
Anecdotal electronic evidence also suggests there are a lot more security incidents than   what is currently reported.
As part of normal information security monitoring, it is quite   common to find information about other companies that have been attacked or even   compromised.
These indicators might be something as simple as malware traffic   emanating from a partner’s network or the observation of another company’s name   showing up in a data dump released by an attacker.
In fact, there are web services like   Shodan that specialize in identifying and cataloging vulnerable systems and devices   including many from the healthcare industry in an easily searchable web interface.
When all of these observations are combined, it leads me, and many of my peers, to believe   that the cybersecurity situation in the healthcare industry is far worse than what public reporting   indicates.
Neither private industry nor the government can solve this problem alone; we must   work collaboratively and transparently to reduce this risk.
Page 5   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships         THE VALUE OF PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN CYBERSECURITY   The notion of public – private partnerships for cybersecurity first gained traction in 1997   following the publication of recommendations from the President’s Commission on Critical   Infrastructure Protection.
These recommendations were codified in Presidential Decision   Directive/NSC 63- Critical Infrastructure Protection which specified the industry segments that   should be considered critical infrastructure, appointed a sector specific agency to coordinate the   public-private partnership, and identified ten tasks that should be accomplished by each sector.
The   tasks included an assessment of threats and vulnerabilities that might impact the sector, the   development of a sector-wide remediation/protection plan, and the sharing of intelligence   information between the government and private sector.
Although subsequent administrations   have tweaked the industries and functions that make up the critical infrastructure and have made   minor modifications to the tasks on which each sector should focus, by and large there has been   support for the concept for two decades.
However, it is only in recent years that the topic of   cybersecurity has become a prominent issue.
The Sector Coordinating Council now devotes a   regular portion of its meetings and monthly teleconferences to discussing developments in the   cybersecurity space and has established working groups to tackle items of common interest   among the members.
The NH-ISAC, created in 2010, has grown from about a dozen original   members to more than 200 participating companies and it continues to attract more and more of        Page 6   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships         the thousands of healthcare entities that exist in the United States.
The NH-ISAC has stood up working groups that work collaboratively to identify   new sources of threat intelligence and ways to disseminate to all parties in the most effective   manner, and to collaborate on ways to more effectively secure “big data” within the healthcare   industry, but both organizations have the potential to do even more.
The SAFE BioPharma Association was founded more than   a decade ago out of a shared desire between the government and private industry to reduce the   cost and complexity of submitting new drug applications to the Food and Drug Administration   (FDA).
The members of SAFE BioPharma worked closely with the FDA, the   National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST), the General Services Administration   (GSA), and regulators in the European Union and Japan to create a digital identity and digital   signature standard that today is accepted by all parties.
The standard creates an interoperable   digital identity ecosystem in which all identities can be trusted at known risk-levels.
It allows   government agencies and private sector healthcare providers to have standardized trust for   authentication and signing.
Vendors have a tool for standardizing trust in their products and   applications and the user can have a single identity for use across the ecosystem.
The standard   has been certified to meet US government federal identity standardsvii and is used on electronic   submissions, contracts, and other critical workflows that require integrity, identity trust, and non-  repudiation around the world.
More importantly, the industry has recently started adopting this        Page 7   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships         digital identity standard for authentication purposes, much in the manner the US Federal   Government rapidly adopted the use of Personal Identity Verification (PIV) cards for strong   authentication following the Office of Personal Management (OPM) breach.
SAFE BioPharma members   hope to increase the use of standards-based authentication credentials across the healthcare   industry.
Particular emphasis is being placed on multi-factor authentication capabilities across   the healthcare industry using the SAFE BioPharma standard and other recognized standards that   meet the same level of security – all based on NIST and GSA standards.
As a participant and user of services provided by all three public-private partnerships, I   feel each provides tremendous value and has become an essential part of my organization’s   cybersecurity program.
We leverage the intelligence provided by the NH-ISAC to update our   defenses on a continuous, 24x7 basis, we use the NH-ISAC’s benchmarking service to identify   areas in where we may learn from our peers, we leverage SAFE BioPharma compliant digital   identities in collaborating with peer organizations, and we actively participated in the recent   DHS Cyberstorm table top exercise.
But there are many opportunities to further mature and   develop these capabilities.
Appoint a Healthcare Sector Cybersecurity Liaison.
HHS should appoint a senior   cybersecurity professional as a liaison to the private sector.
Today the Assistant Secretary   for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) has the responsibility for ensuring the healthcare   sector is prepared to respond to a critical health emergency such as a pandemic flu outbreak   or the disruption of critical health infrastructure from a natural disaster as occurred in New        Page 8   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships          Orleans during Hurricane Katrina.
The Office of National Coordinator (ONC) has a Chief   Privacy Officer who, along with the HHS Office of Civil Rights (OCR), works with the   private sector on privacy policies and implements enforcement actions when necessary.
HHS also has a Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) within the Office of the Chief   Information Officer (CIO) who is primarily responsible for protection of HHS systems and   services.
All four of these offices interact with the private sector but none of them have   cybersecurity outreach as their primary mission.
A cybersecurity liaison would be the   primary focal point for outreach to the private industry on topics of cybersecurity.
The role   would not supplant current responsibilities, but instead focus on education and awareness of   cybersecurity risks within the sector, advocacy for the use of cybersecurity tools and   capabilities provided by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and collection of key   issues from the sector.
The liaison would also chair a GCC working group on cybersecurity   that would work closely with the Sector Coordinating Council equivalent.
Develop Cybersecurity Appendix to Healthcare & Public Sector Specific Plan.
While   cybersecurity concerns were captured in the latest iteration of the Healthcare and Public   Health Sector Specific Plan - May 2016ix, a more thorough and detailed appendix should be   added to the existing plan to better assist public and private sector entities in developing their   own cybersecurity incident response plans.
This appendix should include templates and   guidelines to help smaller and less mature organizations create at least a rudimentary   cybersecurity response plan.
Increase the Quality of Cybersecurity Intelligence and the Speed with Which It is   Shared.
While there has been a significant increase in the quantity and timeliness of   information shared by government agencies via DHS over the last 24 months, there is still        Page 9   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships          opportunity to improve both the quality of information and speed at which it is shared.
Cybersecurity defenders need to respond to threats in minutes, if not seconds.
Waiting days   or even weeks for information to be shared diminishes the value of the information.
For   example, if an entity discovers a sophisticated phishing email that has been able to bypass an   organization’s email filters, it is critical that information on the subject line, sender’s address,   and other data about the message be sent out to others as quickly as possible so that the other   security teams can search for and delete these messages before their users fall victim to an   attack.
Today, members of the NH-ISAC are sharing this type of information in near real-   time.
We still need to increase the percentage of members willing to share but we also need   the government to share healthcare related cyber intelligence at similar speeds.
Facilitate Healthcare Cybersecurity Table Top Exercises and Simulations.
DHS   conducts a nation-wide, cybersecurity exercise every two years.
The latest exercise, Cyber   Storm V, was conducted March 8-10, 2016.
The exercise included a number of   healthcare specific scenarios that tested the readiness of the sector to respond to a   cybersecurity emergency.
As the SSA for the   healthcare sector, HHS should consider conducting smaller and more frequent exercises with   a broader array of healthcare firms and include scenarios that substantially test the resilience   of the sector.
Collaborate on the Implementation of a Digital Healthcare Identity Based on Leading   Government and Private Sector Standard That Are Mature and In Place.
Passwords        Page 10   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships   are still the most frequently used authentication mechanism to gain access to healthcare data   and systems and should not be.
Consequently, if one system gets   breached the attacker can use the same password to access other systems and potentially   escalate the breach/attack.
Most security professionals recommend utilizing multi-factor   authentication solutions to protect critical systems.
smartcard, smartphone, or one-time password generating device) or a biometric method (e.g.
The problem with   this approach is that without standards that allow a digital identity to be reused, users will   quickly be encumbered with a wide array of smartcards, devices, and biometric readers to   gain access to the many systems they need.
This would be costly and extremely complex to   manage and would create significant confusion for the user.
The government and industry   The government and industry have standards and solutions today that will work for patients   and healthcare.
Government agencies and larger   healthcare firms should build out the healthcare identity ecosystem by implementing existing   Healthcare Digital Identity standards.
Such an ecosystem would not only significantly   Page 11               Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships          improve cybersecurity, but also streamline business processes and rationalize the current   fragmented, redundant identity trust issue in healthcare.
Develop Healthcare Sector Implementation Guide to Complement the NIST   Cybersecurity Framework (CSF).
Under Executive 13636 – Improving Critical   Infrastructure Cybersecurity, the White House tasked NIST to develop a cybersecurity   framework that “shall include a set of standards, methodologies, procedures, and processes   that align policy, business, and technological approaches to address cyber risks.”  NIST   published the first version of the Cybersecurity Framework in February 2014.
The   Framework has been quickly adopted by many industry sectors as the baseline against which   the members measure the maturity of their cybersecurity programs.
A recent study by   HIMSSx found that 61% of healthcare companies have already adopted the standard to some   degree.
However, there is a growing demand within the sector for implementation guidelines   that specify how to align with the NIST controls given the unique nature of industry.
NIST   has already developed a draft implementation guideline for the critical manufacturing   industry.
HHS should consider working with NIST and the private sector to produce a set of   specific guidelines for the implementation of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework within   healthcare entities.
Although healthcare delivery and   healthcare insurance are conducted by and large nationally based companies,   pharmaceuticals, medical device companies, research facilities, and some public health   entities operate at an international scale.
It is critical that HHS and the private sector work        Page 12   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships          together with peers in other countries to ensure the adoption of common cybersecurity   standards and identify ways in which threat intelligence may be shared more broadly across   borders.
One of the growing   challenges we face in sharing threat intelligence throughout the sector is that smaller, less   mature entities without cybersecurity teams have a significant challenge consuming the   information that is shared among NH-ISAC members.
This   information facilitates the rapid response necessary to deal with quickly evolving threats, but   it hinders the ability of less mature entities to consume the information.
As larger   organizations move to automated sharing and response, this is likely to increase the gap   between them and the small entities.
HHS should work with the private sector to identify   ways in which smaller entities can stay aligned with the quickly changing methods of   automated sharing.
Recruit Departing Service Members to Help Offset the Shortage of Cybersecurity   Personnel in the Critical Infrastructure Segments   One of the greatest challenges we face in the healthcare sector and many other critical   infrastructure segments is the shortage of adequately trained personnel to address the rapidly   changing cybersecurity threat.
Some studies have indicated that there as many as 200,000   open cybersecurity roles in the United States alone and that number is sure to rise as new   software and devices work their way into every aspect of our livesxi.
HHS, DHS, and other   Sector Specific Agencies should work with private industry to identify critical cybersecurity   roles within the private sector for departing military personnel.
The departing military        Page 13   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships          personnel would be required to take a basic cybersecurity curriculum at Cyber Command   before leaving active duty.
In return for this valuable training, the service member would be   required to serve an additional period of time in the National Guard or Reserves during   which time the service member would be subject to recall in a national or state-level cyber   emergency within any critical infrastructure segment.
The private sector would assist the   service member in the completion of any degree required for the private sector role.
This   would provide an immediate pipeline of cybersecurity talent to the private sector.
It would   also provide states and the federal government with a cadre of trained cyber professionals   upon which they could draw.
I believe that if these recommendations were implemented, we would significantly improve   the state of cybersecurity in the healthcare industry.
If we are unsuccessful in these endeavors   and we are unable to significantly reduce the cybersecurity risk that we face, we may delay or   even lose the opportunity to utilize promising new health information technology that has the   potential to save and improve lives around the world.
Page 14   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships                                                                                                                       i http://www.agcs.allianz.com/insights/white-papers-and-case-studies/allianz-risk-barometer- 2017/    ii https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/SASC_Unclassified_2016_ATA_SFR_FINAL.pdf        Page 15   Cybersecurity in the Healthcare Sector: Strengthening Public-Private Partnerships                                                                                                                                                                         iii http://www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?htmlfid=SEJ03320USEN    iv The reporting of material events is only required at publicly traded companies.
Many, if not  most, of the healthcare delivery entities are privately-held or operate as non-profit associations  and this requirement would not apply.
v https://www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/-american-health-economy- illustrated_145021349951.pdf     vi http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/margin.html    vii The SAFE BioPharma standard meets both the US Federal Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)  and Federal Identity, Credential, & Access Management (FICAM) standards.
viii http://www.verizonenterprise.com/verizon-insights-lab/dbir/2016/    ix https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/nipp-ssp-healthcare-public-health-2015- 508.pdf    x The second annual HIMSS Analytics HIT Security and Risk Management Study    xi http://peninsulapress.com/2015/03/31/cybersecurity-jobs-growth/      Cybersecurity Public Private Partnerships: Challenges and Opportunities    By Justin S. Daniels and Joe D. Whitley   Originally published in Law Journal Newsletters' Cybersecurity Law & Strategy, February 2017   The  allegations  that  Russia  hacked  the  Democratic  National  Committee  (DNC)  is  the  latest  evidence  that  cybersecurity  has  and  will  continue  to  have  an  overarching  impact  on  our  daily  lives.
Further  complicating the cyber threat is  that it is  evolving so quickly that  it outstrips the  ability  of  our  private  or  government  sectors  to  adequately  address  the  threat  and  its  consequences.
The severity of the cyber threat has resulted in the private sector and the United  States government partnering to identify and respond to threats that can impact entire industries,  especially  financial  services  and the  electrical  grid,  two  essential  parts of  our  country’s  critical  infrastructure.
This article examines: 1) the challenges that inhibit partnering between the private  and  public  sectors;  2)  how  such  partnership  is  addressed  in  the  Cybersecurity  Information  Sharing Act (CISA) of 2015; and 3) what this all means going forward.
Cybersecurity  impacts  individual  privacy,  commerce  among  businesses,  and  our  national  security.
Critical infrastructure such as  financial services are owned, operated and protected by  the  private  sector,  which  is  mainly  concerned  with  competing  in  their  industry  and  making  a  profit.
See,  Eric  A.  Kaijankoski,  Cybersecurity  Information  Sharing  Between  Public-Private  Sector  Agencies,  Naval  Post  Graduate  School  Theses  and  Dissertation,  March,  2015,  page  35.
Moreover,  the  financial  services  industry  facilitates  commerce  globally.
Meanwhile,  the  government  is  concerned  that  a  hack  could  render  our  entire  financial  services  industry  inoperable for just a few days and place our national security in extreme peril.
Upon closer inspection, however, significant cultural and legal barriers exist that  can hinder further cooperation necessary to effectively combat the cyber threat.
Does  government  involvement  mean  providing  unfettered  access  to  systems  and  ceding  control  of  such  systems  along  with  confidential  information  and  incident  response  strategies?
See,  Judith  H.  Germano,  Cybersecurity  Partnerships:  A  New  Era  of  Public-Private  Collaboration, The Center on Law and Security NYU School of Law, October 2014, page 3.
The private sector is also concerned that disclosing vulnerabilities  or  threats  could  result  in  an  unwelcome  visit  from  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC),  Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)  or  other  industry  government  regulators  voicing  concerns  about  cyber  compliance.
A  company   may  fear  that  such  collaboration  with  a  government  entity  might  intentionally  or  unwittingly  result  in  a  release  of  proprietary  information  that  makes  industry  competitors  aware  of  a  vulnerability that they might exploit for economic benefit.
Additionally  the  unsettled,  conflicting  and  evolving  cybersecurity  U.S. regulatory  regime  gives  the private sector pause when considering closer collaboration with the government.
Liability for    breaches  under  the  current  regulatory  framework  can  include  actions  by  diverse  governmental  agencies  that  can  include  the  FTC,  SEC,  Department  of  Justice  (DOJ)  and  state  attorneys  general.
Criminals  and  nation  states  who  conduct  cyberattacks  are  a  separate  category  of  challenges  impacting  the  development  of  a  private  and  public  partnership.
According  to  Assistant  U.S.  Attorney (AUSA) Steven D. Grimberg, Deputy Chief, Financial Fraud & Cyber Division of the  U.S. Attorney’s Office, Northern District of Georgia: “It is difficult to overstate the importance  of reporting breach activity to the government, especially if it’s coming from actors outside the  United States.
A Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) may think no information has been  taken, but it does not address that the network that was breached might be used to gain access to  another network, or used as a test run to see if a method of attack is successful.”    In  response  to  CISO’s  who  believe  that  sharing  information  with  government  prosecutors  may  trigger a visit from a regulator; AUSA Grimberg emphasized that: “Prosecutors are not generally  in  the  business  of  sharing  information  with  regulators.
The  prosecutor’s  goal  is  to  find  the  perpetrator or perpetrators who may be hurting multiple companies and possible national security  implications.”  These  comments  underline  the  delicate  balance  between  a  company  concerned  that sharing information may trigger a regulatory investigation with the prompt investigation of  perpetrators  whose  attack  may  have  industry  wide  or  national  security  implications.
AUSA  Grimberg’s  comments  also  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  government’s  role  in  apprehending  cyber  criminals  and  regulating  the  private  sector.
From  a  private  sector  perspective,  industry  is gratified  when  cyber criminals  are  brought  to  justice  while at  the  same  time  chafing  over  the  cost  of  complying  with  what  the  company  or  private  sector  believes  are  overly burdensome government regulations.
Trust,  complicated  and  overlapping  Federal  and  state  cybersecurity  regulatory  regimes,  and  balancing the prosecutor and regulator roles are a significant but not exhaustive list of challenges  that face the growth of public private partnership.
First, it authorizes  companies  to  monitor  and  implement  defensive  measures  on  their  own  information  systems  to  counter  cyber  threats.
Second,  the  law  provides  certain  protections  to  encourage  companies  to  voluntarily  share  information  —  specifically,  information  about  “cyber  threat  indicators”  and  “defensive measures” — with the federal, state and local governments, and other companies and   private entities.
See, Brad S. Karp, Federal Guidance on the Cybersecurity Information Sharing  Act  of  2015,  Harvard  Law  School  Forum  on  Corporate  Governance  and  Financial  Regulation,  March 3, 2016, page 1.
CISA  specifically  addresses  private  sector  concerns  about  legal  liability  by  shielding  private  entities from any cause of action brought in a federal or state court for monitoring an information  system and for sharing cyber threat indicators or defensive measures in accordance with CISA.
Information shared under CISA will not be used for federal and state regulatory purposes.
CISA  also grants information shared with the government an exemption from Freedom of Information  Act (FOIA) requests under federal or state law.
CISA’s utility however, is weakened by the fact  that it applies only if a company voluntarily shares information with the government and there is  no statutory or regulatory requirement that a company share such information.
A public company  will  also  have  to  weigh  if  sharing  information  with  the  government  under  CISA  satisfies  a  materiality threshold triggering disclosure in a public filing.
The financial services industry  is  undertaking  efforts  that  are  worthy  of  emulation  by  other  industries.
The  Financial  Services  Information  Sharing  Analysis  Center  (FS-ISAC)  is  one  of  several  sharing  centers  that  are  conduits  for  information  sharing  among  the  public  and  private  sector.
In  addition  to  information  sharing,  the  FS-ISAC  conducts  an  annual  Cyber  Attack  Against  Payment  Processes  Simulation.
FS-ISAC  tests  the  nearly  1,000  and  growing  participating  financial institutions that use payment services in responding to simulated cyber attacks.
The value of cyber attack simulations and evaluating the incident response to the attack cannot  be overemphasized.
When asked what the most important thing companies can do differently in  dealing  with  a  cyber  threat,  AUSA  Grimberg  responded:  “Many  companies  that  have  a  cyber  incident response plan fail to practice the plan and see how it works in a cyber attack simulation.
Companies  should  have  a  tabletop  exercise  in  responding  to  a  hack  to  see  how  their  cyber  incident  response  plan  works,  and  if  it  needs  to  be  refined  based  on  that  simulated  situation.”  Cyber  threat  simulations  are  a  key  ingredient  in  a  21st  century  trust  recipe  that  is  necessary  to  cultivate improved public private collaboration.
The high stakes, sophistication and acceleration of technology vulnerable to cyber attacks means  that  existing  collaboration  is  necessary,  but  not  sufficient,  in  responding  to  the  cyber  threat.
In  the coming years, the private and public sector will need to find proactive, sensible and flexible  ways  to  share  information.
*****   Justin  S.  Daniels,  a  shareholder  in  Baker  Donelson’s  Atlanta  office,  serves  as  the  head  of  the  Baker Donelson Cybersecurity Accelerator and Baker Donelson’s Atlanta Emerging Companies  Group.
Joe  D.  Whitley,  a  shareholder  in  Baker  Donelson’s  Atlanta  and  Washington,  DC,  offices,  chairs  the  firm’s  Government  Enforcement  and  Investigations  Group  and  served  as  the  first  General  Counsel  of  the  United  States Department of Homeland Security.
Improving our Nation’s Cybersecurity through   the Public-Private Partnership   A White Paper      Presented by                              March 8, 2011      1         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   We live and work in, and are dependent on, a networked world.
That is why the   Business Software Alliance, the Center for Democracy and Technology, the Internet Security  Alliance, TechAmerica, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce believe that the cybersecurity of  our critical infrastructure must be a national priority.
However, the complexity and  interconnected nature of the Internet, and the ever-evolving and sophisticated threat  environment, put cybersecurity beyond the reach of any single entity: to secure our critical  infrastructure, companies must work together, government must coordinate its efforts, and  industry and government must collaborate.
To that end, many government and industry organizations have made considerable   investments over the years to develop a strong public-private partnership.
Those investments  are paying off: this paper details many of the important cybersecurity achievements that the  partnership has delivered.
Specifically, we make a series of recommendations that  build upon the conclusions of President Obama’s Cyberspace Policy Review in seven important  areas of cybersecurity:   ?
Risk Management:   o  Standards: Government and industry should utilize existing international  standards and work through consensus bodies to develop and strengthen  international standards for cybersecurity.
o  Assessing Risk: Government and industry need to recognize that their risk-  o   management perspectives stem from different roles and responsibilities.
Where  government demands a higher standard of care, market incentives need to be  available to accommodate non-commercial needs for security.
Incentives: Government and industry must develop a menu of market incentives  to motivate companies to voluntarily upgrade their cybersecurity.
Incident Management: Government should fully establish industry’s seat in the  integrated watch center and begin evaluation and process for growing industry’s  presence.
Industry should ensure a long-term plan for filling the watch center seats;      2      ?
and participants should report lessons learned from collaborative exercises as soon as  possible and undertake improvement measures on a timely basis.
Information Sharing and Privacy: Government and industry should clearly articulate  information needs and how to promote more effective information-sharing to address  those needs; information-sharing for cybersecurity purposes should be transparent and  should comply with fair information practice principles; government should consider  how it can share more classified and sensitive information, particularly the parts of that  information that can help the private sector defend its systems; and in consultation with  interested parties, including industry and civil liberties organizations, Congress should  consider whether narrow adjustments to surveillance laws are needed for cybersecurity  purposes.
International Engagement: Industry and government need to engage international  organizations and standards - making processes and work together to develop a strategy  for engagement, capacity building, and collaboration on issues of global concern.
Supply Chain Security: Government should expand its participation in the international  system that develops supply chain security standards and work with industry to identify  and disseminate them.
Government should then leverage these standards when it  acquires technology and take steps to ensure it does not acquire counterfeit technology  products.
Innovation and Research and Development: The public-private partnership should be  used to create a genuine National Cybersecurity Research and Development Plan with  prioritized, national-level objectives and a detailed road map that specifies the  respective roles of each partner.
The plan and its implementation road map should be  regularly reviewed by the partners and adjusted as necessary.
Education and Awareness: The public-private partnership should enhance cybersecurity   public awareness and education, and increase the number of cyber-professionals  available to both government and business, including through policies that boost the  number of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) college students  graduating each year.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~      3      INTRODUCTION:  THE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP NEEDS TO BE FULLY REALIZED  THROUGH MEANINGFUL AND REGULAR COLLABORATION   The security of private-sector and government network infrastructure is a national   priority.
U.S.-based information networks and critical infrastructures are complex and diverse,  and most of them are owned and operated by the private sector.
Industry has been working  continually to enhance the security and resiliency of these systems and is committed to  continuing these efforts through a voluntary partnership with government.
Industry players  have created and developed new products and services that make up information systems and  networks, and they continue to innovate to enhance those products and services for  operability, productivity, stability and security.
Given the complexity and interconnected nature of information systems and networks,  as well as an ever-evolving and sophisticated threat environment, no one organization or entity  can address U.S. national cybersecurity alone.
Industry players must work together,  government entities must harmonize their approaches to protecting critical infrastructure, and  government and industry must work together to address common concerns and build  collaborative solutions.
The public-private partnership on critical infrastructure protection and  cybersecurity has an evolutionary history that has culminated in the partnership structure that  government and industry collectively created and utilize today under the National  Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP).1    The current critical infrastructure protection partnership is sound, the framework is   widely accepted, and the construct is one in which both government and industry are heavily  invested.
However, an effective  and sustainable system of cybersecurity requires a fuller implementation of the voluntary  industry-government partnership originally described in the NIPP.
Abandoning the core tenets  of the model in favor of a more government-centric set of mandates would be  counterproductive to both our economic and national security.
Rather than creating a new  mechanism to accommodate the public-private partnership, government and industry need to  continue to develop and enhance the existing one.
In order to more fully articulate the benefits  and continuing needs of the partnership, this report outlines key components of the  government-industry interaction in cybersecurity.
The key components of the outline derive  heavily from the Cyberspace Policy Review (CSPR) and industry priorities, and we examine each  for the benefits, successes, and outstanding objectives.
1 The National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) is available at  http://www.dhs.gov/files/programs/editorial_0827.shtm#0      4      Government and industry sources have documented the substantial progress the   current market-oriented process has made.
In 2009 President Obama commissioned staff from  the National Security Council to conduct an intensive review of our nation’s cybersecurity which  found that “many technical and network management solutions that would greatly enhance  security already exist in the marketplace but are not always used because of cost and  complexity.”2    The marketplace has seen the development of many products and services that provide   for greater cybersecurity.
Their effectiveness has been affirmed by both government and  industry studies that note that a significant number of cyber events could have been prevented  or had their effects mitigated by using the standards practices and technologies the  marketplace has already created.3   The CSPR’s finding that cost and complexity, not lack of ability or commitment, are the   largest problems in implementing effective cyber solutions has also been confirmed by multiple  independent studies.
This research shows that although many enterprises are investing heavily  in cybersecurity, many others, largely due to the economic downturn, are reducing their  cybersecurity investments.4 As President Obama has noted, “Due to the interconnected nature  of the system this lack of uniform implementation of sound security practices both undermines  critical infrastructure and makes using traditional regulatory mechanisms difficult to achieve  security.”5   A number of policy and operational accomplishments have already been achieved   through the current industry-government partnership.
These accomplishments include the  development of cybersecurity standards and best practices through the global, multi- stakeholder ecosystem of standard-setting organizations, creation of the Sector Coordinating  Councils, Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council (CIPAC) legal structure, the  completion of a National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP), the successful execution of the  Cyber Storm exercises, and several sector risk assessments.
There have also been                                                                2 Obama Administration, Cyberspace Policy Review – Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and  Communications Infrastructure at 31.
3 Aerospace Industries Association Annual Conference, Robert Bigman comments on Cyber Security, Washington,  DC in October 2008; U.S. Senate, hearing before the Committee on Judiciary, Subcommittee on Terrorism and  Homeland Security, Testimony of Richard C. Schaffer, Jr. Information Assurance Director of the National  Security Agency, November 17, 2009, http://judiciary.senate.gov/pdf/11-17- 09%20Schaeffer%20Testimony.pdf, Verizon, 2010 Data Breach Investigations Report,  http://www.verizonbusiness.com/resources/reports/rp_2010-data-breach-report_en_xg.pdf;  PricewaterhouseCoopers, The Global State of Information Security, 2005; Verizon, 2008 Data Breach  Investigations Report, http://www.verizonbusiness.com/resources/security/databreachreport.pdf.
4 PricewaterhouseCoopers, The Global State of Information Security, 2008.
Center for Strategic & International Studies, In the Crossfire: Critical Infrastructure in the Age of Cyber War, 2010.
5 White House, Remarks by President Obama at White House Meeting on Cyber Security, July, 2010.
5      improvements in information-sharing mechanisms, such as Information Sharing and Analysis  Centers (ISACs), the National Council of ISACs and other successful sector-specific information- sharing mechanisms, and the launch of the National Cybersecurity and Communications  Integration Center (NCCIC), with seats designated for government and industry enabling  ongoing coordination, planning and response.
While all these efforts and others make government and industry more coordinated and   secure, the partnership has not yet been utilized to implement the economic, technical and  operational issues the NIPP calls for.
The CSPR confirms this observation:   “The public-private partnership for cybersecurity must evolve to define clearly the  nature of the relationship including the roles and responsibilities of each of the partners.”6    The partnership structure that industry and government collectively created under the   NIPP clearly articulates what is required to build this system.
Government and industry have  the opportunity to work more collaboratively to implement the following agreed upon  activities:   “The success of the [public-private] partnership depends on articulating the mutual   benefits to government and private sector partners.
In assessing the value proposition for the private sector,  there is a clear national security and homeland security interest in ensuring the collective  protection of the Nation’s [critical infrastructure and key resources] (CI/KR).
Government can  encourage industry to go beyond efforts already justified by their corporate business needs to  assist in broad-scale CI/KR protection through activities such as:   ?
Providing owners and operators timely, analytical, accurate, and useful   information...   ?
Ensuring industry is engaged as early as possible in the development of initiatives   and policies related to [the NIPP]   ?
Articulating to corporate leaders ...both the business and national security benefits   of investing in security measures that exceed their business case   ?
Creating an environment that encourages and supports incentives for companies to   voluntarily adopt widely accepted, sound security practices   ?
Providing support for research needed to enhance future CI/KR protection efforts.”7                                                                 6 Obama Administration, Cyberspace Policy Review – Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and  Communications Infrastructure, May 2009 at 33.
Inclusion – both public and private parties endeavor to include all pertinent  participants (providers and users) in the partnership framework;   ?
Equality – both public and private parties have an equal voice and the ability to   participate in all phases of the partnership and its component projects from  conceptualization to development to implementation;   ?
Trust – the partnership provides for institutional and relationship-based trust   mechanisms to foster collaboration and information exchange;   ?
Greatest Good – the partnership strives to develop and meet the strategic and   planning objectives that have the most benefit for all parties involved in the  partnership and their respective constituents.
Properly constructed and augmented, the public-private partnership model for  cybersecurity also has significant privacy and civil liberties advantages over other, more  government-directed models.
The partnership leaves network monitoring responsibilities for  private networks where they belong – with the private sector operators – rather than having  governmental agencies monitor those networks.
At the same time, the  partnership allows for robust coordination and information sharing between the government  and private sector network operators within carefully defined limits, which comports with both  legal and constitutional obligations.
Rather, building on the promise and progress  articulated by the NIPP and the CSPR would more fully implement the core principles identified  above.
The following sections of this paper outline how this can be accomplished while also  fulfilling the pledge President Obama made upon the release of the Administration’s CSPR:      7         “Let me be very clear: My Administration will not dictate security standards for private  companies.
On the contrary we will collaborate with industry to find technology solutions that  ensure our security and promote prosperity.”     President Barack Obama, Release of the Cyberspace Policy Review, May 29, 2009     I.
RISK MANAGEMENT   Standards    Many cybersecurity standards have been and are continually being established and   updated through the transparent consensus processes of standards development organizations  (SDO).
Many of these processes are international in design and scope, and they routinely  include active engagement by multinational corporations and various government entities that  participate as developers or users of the technology.
The multitude of continually evolving  standards is essential because of the widely disparate configurations that are in use, and these  configurations are constantly evolving and being updated to support rapid innovation in a  dynamic industry.
Both industry and government organizations voluntarily adopt the resulting  best practices and standards that best fit their unique requirements, based on their roles,  business plans, and cultural or regulatory environments.
This historic process of standards  development is widely embraced is, highly participatory, and maintains high credibility in the  global community.
Not only does the standards regime facilitate interoperability between  systems built by different vendors, it also facilitates competition between vendors that leads to  greater choice and lower cost.
Moreover, it spurs the development and use of innovative and  secure technologies.
Implementation of these resulting standards and best practices can also  be highly effective in improving cybersecurity.
An effective approach to cybersecurity policy needs to leverage the existing system of   standards development rather than replace it with one that has a distinct bias in favor of  national or participant interests.
We have already seen that attempts to impose nation-specific  requirements under the auspices of security are not embraced by the private sector or the civil  liberties and human rights communities for both public policy and powerful economic reasons.
A government-controlled system of standards development that resides outside the existing  global regime will not be accepted.
If imposed, it would quickly become a second-tier system  without widespread user or technology community adoption, thereby fracturing the global  network of networks and weakening its security.
8      Governments, either through national or international bodies, can serve an important  security function by funding independent evaluations of the existing and emerging standards  for their security effectiveness and applicability, and by working with industry to develop  profiles of existing standards8, as opposed to creating new standards.
Naturally, varying  standards formulas will provide differing levels of security and likely at different cost levels.
Recommendation: Government and industry should utilize existing standards and work through  consensus bodies to develop and strengthen international standards for cybersecurity.
Assessing Risk   A general consensus has emerged that the most effective path to cybersecurity is a risk- based approach that encompasses an assessment of threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences.
As suggested in the NIPP, government partners and industry players often assess risk  differently, based on their differing missions and objectives.
Because the economic consequences of  some cybersecurity failures can be quite high, including the loss of intellectual property that is  expensive to develop, the damage inflicted to the brand of the affected company, or the  erosion of trust in an unstable system that is critical to its success, cybersecurity expenditures  that are made to avoid these failures are also quite high.
The risk analysis drives relatively high investment in cybersecurity measures by many,   but not all, enterprises.
A comparatively higher tolerance for risk may exist if the cost of  security is more than the perceived or anticipated loss.
Risks to the nation vary widely, and neither government nor the private sector can   afford to protect everything against all risks, be they physical or cyber.
Managing these risks is  particularly difficult in an environment of limited resources and security interdependence.
When evaluating risk, the interests of both industry and government need to be considered,  including decisions that require trade-offs.9   Corporate and governmental risk management calculations can often lead to different   decisions for various reasons, including differences in perception and tolerance of risk or  differences in motivations.
Government can act as an enabler to align these risk management  expectations.
If targeted regulatory action to bridge these differences is considered, it should                                                                8 Profiles are used to define how a standard will be deployed, and against which interoperability testing can be  used to demonstrate compliance.
9 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Strengthening the Use of Risk Management Principles in Homeland  Security (GAO-08-627 SP), April 2008, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08627sp.pdf.
Alternatively policymakers should first consider providing market incentives to  the private sector to meet shared national security and public safety requirements.
Recommendation: Government and industry need to recognize that their risk-management  perspectives stem from different roles and responsibilities.
Where the government demands a  higher standard of care, market incentives need to be available to accommodate non- commercial needs for security.
Incentives   Currently, the most effective way to stimulate innovation and development of  infrastructure is through economic incentives.
In the last century, the incentive-based  approach, in contrast to the government-centric regulatory model seen in other parts of the  world, resulted in the creation of information infrastructures in the United States that provided  the engine for America’s economic competitiveness in the 20th century.
A similar and  modernized version of this market-incentive model needs to be developed to meet our nation’s  present cybersecurity needs.
Such a system will likely enhance not only our security but also  our economy.
Public and private studies indicate that this model will work for cybersecurity.
The CSPR found that policymakers should consider, in consultation with affected parties, a mix  of tailored incentives to achieve the nation’s cybersecurity objectives.
Central to this finding is the realization that cybersecurity is not simply a technical or   operational issue but a strategic and economic one.
A 2010 study conducted by the Center for  Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) states that a primary obstacle to ensuring the security  of critical networks is cost.10 Similarly, a survey by PricewaterhouseCoopers of business  executives responsible for their organization’s information security reported that roughly half  of them pointed to the recession as a cause for restraint in funding cybersecurity.
One of the most immediate, pragmatic, and effective steps that the government could   take to improve our nation’s cybersecurity would be to implement the recommendations made  in the CSPR to explore incentives, such as liability considerations, indemnification, and tax  incentives.
Tax incentives that encourage establishing additional cybersecurity investments,   such as the R&D tax credit;                                                                10 Center for Strategic and International Studies, In the Crossfire: Critical Infrastructure in the Age of Cyber War,  2010, http://csis.org/event/crossfire-critical-infrastructure-age-cyber-war      10      ?
Grant funding using effectively in other homeland security areas such as emergency  preparedness and response.
Critical infrastructure industries can use grant funds for  research and development, to purchase equipment, and to train personnel;   ?
Streamlining regulatory procedures, which would cut both government and industry   costs;   ?
Updating the SAFETY Act to better appreciate the cyber threat that has become  more evident since its enactment.
This Act, which provides a mix of marketing,  insurance and liability benefits for technologies designated or certified by DHS, can  be expanded to standards and practices as well as technologies that protect against  commercial as well as terrorist threats;    ?
Liability protections or regulatory obligations (e.g., for utilities) adjusting in   numerous ways to provide incentives for enhanced security practices, such as  adoption of standards and practices beyond what is required to meet commercial  risks, or enhanced information sharing.
Stimulating the growth of a private cyber insurance industry that can both provide  private economic incentives to spur greater cybersecurity efforts while also creating  a private market mechanism that fosters adoption and compliance.
The government  should give consideration to implementing reinsurance programs to help underwrite  the development of cybersecurity insurance programs.
Over time, these  reinsurance programs could be phased out as insurance markets gain experience  with cybersecurity coverage.
To accommodate the needs of a wide variety of critical infrastructures with different   economic models, the public-private partnership should develop a menu of incentives that can  be tied to voluntary adoption of widely-accepted and proven-successful security best  practices, standards, and technologies.
The R&D tax credit may be the most attractive option  for an IT security vendor, while a defense firm may be more interested in procurement  options, an electric utility in a streamlined regulatory environment, or an IT-user enterprise in  an insurance discount and risk transfer.
Many of these incentives are deployed successfully in  other areas of the economy, but not yet to cybersecurity.
11         Recommendation: Working through the NIPP framework, government and industry must  develop a menu of market incentives that government can put in place to motivate companies  to voluntarily adopt additional security practices and technology investments.
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT   Companies and government entities regularly and successfully respond to cyber attacks     and other intrusions on their networks.
In many organizations, there are processes and  procedures for incident response and reporting that are used to protect their networks and  information assets on a regular basis.
It is when an incident becomes too big or complex for  one organization to handle alone that collaborative incident management – and partnership – is  important in order to prevent, defend against, and recover from the attack.
Many attacks have  called for collaborative action, and public and private partners learn from each incident how to  communicate, share information, and remediate the problem.
In addition, they engage in  exercises that are designed to test processes and plan for incident response from which they  continue to learn what the most effect measures are in any given circumstance.
The Cyber Storm exercise series has been an excellent tool for understanding the  possible course of any particular incident – or combination of attacks – and for assessing  existing response measures and determining gaps.
Industry has been a partner in the planning  and play of the exercises, which have spanned the critical infrastructure sectors and  incorporated many aspects of attacks on that infrastructure.
In each of the three Cyber Storm  exercises, the participants have used the lessons learned to make corresponding changes in  their internal procedures and in the procedures used to collaborate among the participants.
In the most recent Cyber Storm III exercise, the scenarios tested the preparation and     processes laid out in the National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP) completed prior to the  exercise.
The development of the NCIRP was a collaborative process between industry and  government.
It resulted in a plan that was meant to be instructive for both groups, but flexible  enough to accommodate the varying types of scenarios that could occur.
The official results and  lessons learned from Cyber Storm III are still being assessed and reported, but the immediate  observations from the exercise are already being evaluated and integrated into organizations’  planning procedures.
12      Rigid response protocols and procedures are not effective in managing each possible     type of incident, and it has been important to recognize and acknowledge that there is no one- size-fits-all in cyber incident response.
Cyber incidents do not occur in one moment; they can  evolve and grow in nature and impact over time.
These attributes require flexibility and an  iterative evaluation mechanism that includes impacted parties – those that are the victim(s),  and those that can provide assistance.
Through the National Cyber Coordination and Integration Center (NCCIC), government   and industry are in the early stages of implementing a long-standing recommendation that  industry responders from the IT and communications sectors should work together with their  government counterparts in an integrated operations center so that their respective expertise,  analysis, and response capabilities can be shared and leveraged on a sustained basis – not just  in times of crisis.
The NCCIC is a very positive development in the public-private partnership  and should be strengthened by the full participation of industry.
Recommendation:  Government should fully establish industry’s seat in the integrated watch  center and begin evaluation and process for growing industry’s presence; industry should  ensure a long-term plan for filling the watch center seats; and participants should report  lessons learned from collaborative exercises as soon as possible and undertake improvement  measures on a timely basis.
INFORMATION SHARING AND PRIVACY   Effective information sharing is crucial to any collective effort to prevent cyber attacks     and to respond to cyber incidents.
Information sharing, as practiced today, is not sufficient or effective enough to address  cybersecurity threats.
Government and industry partners should first articulate the types and  sources of information and analysis that need to be shared in order to achieve our nation’s  cybersecurity goals and identify the types of information that are not being sufficiently shared.
Various proposals have been put forward to impose mandates on industry to share information  with a new government “clearinghouse” that would process the information it received,  achieve situational awareness with respect to the health of major public and private networks,  and disseminate information to owners and operators of those networks to prevent and  respond to cyber incidents.
13      However, the objective should be to improve the quality, not necessarily the quantity,  of the information shared.
Rather, the scope of the information exchange should be driven by  an analysis of the respective roles of the private sector and the government and by a better  understanding of the collective or collaborative action needed to combat current or future  attacks.
Based on such a framework, more nimble approaches can be developed to muster the  kind of information sharing necessary to meet cybersecurity challenges.
Also, such a  framework will more likely produce information-sharing procedures that do not involve the  routine sharing of data about traffic over private networks, which poses acute concerns for civil  liberties and the protection of financial and proprietary information or intellectual property.
Some sectors, such as finance,  information technology and communications, are well known to have strong and proven  information-sharing capabilities.
An approach to information-sharing that focuses on  identifying information requirements for sectors, and organizations within sectors, and building  the capacity of these existing information sharing mechanisms and on building the capacity of  the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (U.S.-CERT) in DHS is more likely to have  immediate results.
Enhanced self-interest and a flexible approach are more likely than government   mandates to result in the sharing of the most useful cybersecurity information.
As with any  other partnership function, information sharing is founded upon and enabled by trust.
For example, government can increase market-based  incentives for sharing information through mechanisms such as creating safe harbors, so that  information that is shared about an incident, and that belongs to carefully defined categories of  cybersecurity information, is not used to establish liability about the incident.
Information sharing also needs to evolve with modern threat patterns.
For example, the     information sharing model referenced in the CSPR11 shifts the focus from sharing inbound  attacks and technical vulnerabilities to unauthorized outbound traffic and needs to be  developed.
Since many modern attacks such as advanced persistent threats (APT) are not  successful until data is exported from the system, managing unauthorized URLs and websites                                                               11 Obama Administration, Cyberspace Policy Review – Assuring a Trusted and Resilient  Information and Communications Infrastructure, May 2009 at A-4, citing Internet Security alliance, paper by Jeff  Brown, Raytheon Company, entitled A National Model for Cyber Protection Through Disrupting Attacker Command  and Control Channels, March 2009.
Sharing this information side-steps some of the current barriers to  sharing since no proprietary or source data is required.
Moreover, simply blocking unauthorized  command and control sites is much easier; hence, this actionable information can be shared  broadly using something similar to the current anti-virus model, which may even allow for the  development of a market-based system with incentives for both the sharing and distributing  parties.
The government can also play a role by more effectively sharing the cybersecurity   information that industry would find valuable to identify and remove the most sophisticated  attacks.
There should be an assessment of the extent to which attack signatures and other  information encountered by intelligence agencies can be shared with industry.
The current  policy against sharing that data can be detrimental to security if information is not shared with  those that need it to meet their security missions.
Actionable threat  information sharing and effective response requires trusted sharing at the controlled  unclassified information (CUI) level with ISACs and equivalent information sharing mechanisms  appropriate for each sector.
Protection of personal privacy is essential to the operation of any cybersecurity     information-sharing or collection activity.
It furthers an important societal value – personal  privacy – and will promote public acceptance of necessary cybersecurity measures.
Cybersecurity measures should honor the promise of the Obama Administration and ensure  that the monitoring of private sector networks for malware or other malicious activity is  conducted by the private sector entities that operate them, not by the government.
“Our pursuit of cybersecurity will not – I repeat, will not – include [governmental] monitoring of  private sector networks or Internet traffic.
We will preserve and protect the personal privacy  and civil liberties that we cherish as Americans.”        President Barack Obama, Release of the Cyberspace Policy Review, May 29, 2009      Building on the premise that system operators should be responsible for monitoring   their own systems, the analysis, collection and sharing of communications containing personally  identifiable information (PII) for cybersecurity purposes should comport generally with the Fair  Information Practice Principles.
DHS adopted an articulation of these principles in its 2008      15      Privacy Policy Guide.12  In the cybersecurity context, application of these principles would mean  that:   ?
Users are given notice of the cybersecurity monitoring and information sharing   program and that it may involve collection and use of PII;   ?
The cybersecurity purpose for which the PII would be collected is carefully   articulated;   ?
Only the PII necessary to accomplish the purpose is collected and shared, and it is   used only for cybersecurity matters;   ?
PII collected for cybersecurity purposes should be retained only as long as it takes to   fulfill the specified purpose, and then should be deleted by all parties;   ?
To the maximum extent feasible, information is sanitized of information identifying   innocent parties before it is shared;   ?
The PII collected is accurate, relevant, and timely, and it is properly safeguarded   against unauthorized access or improper disclosure; and   ?
Moreover, the collection and sharing of communications information for cybersecurity  purposes must comport with surveillance statues, including the Wiretap Act, 18 U.S.C.
These laws already give substantial authority to providers and other system  operators to monitor their own networks for cybersecurity.
For example, the Wiretap Act  permits electronic communication service providers to intercept, use, and disclose  communications passing over their networks while they are engaged in any activity that is a  “necessary incident” to the protection of their rights and property.13  In addition, the computer  trespasser exception to the Wiretap Act permits a service provider to authorize the government  to intercept the communications of a person who accesses a computer without authorization if  there are reasonable grounds to believe that the communication is relevant to an investigation  of the trespass.14 Transparency about the extent of disclosures now being made under these  exceptions would enhance the ability of Congress and the public to assess their effectiveness  and impact on privacy.
While current law provides substantial authority to collect, use, and disclose   communications, including content for self-defense purposes, it does not provide explicit                                                                12 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Policy Guidance Memorandum, December 29, 2008,  http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_policyguide_2008-01.pdf  13 18 U.S.C.
As noted above, further inquiry is needed  to determine exactly what information needs to be shared, but where there are legal barriers  to necessary information sharing, it may be necessary for Congress to create a very narrow  exception to the surveillance laws to permit such disclosures.
Under any such exception,  disclosures should be permissive and not mandatory and should be made only for cybersecurity  purposes and only when a reasonableness standard is met.
Recommendation: Government and industry should clearly articulate information needs and  how to promote more effective information sharing to address those needs; information  sharing for cybersecurity purposes should be transparent and should comply with fair  information practice principles; government should consider how it can share more classified  and sensitive information, particularly the parts of that information that can help the private  sector defend its systems; and in consultation with interested parties, including industry and  civil liberties organizations, Congress should consider whether narrow adjustments to  surveillance laws are needed for cybersecurity purposes.
INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT   The cyber networks and infrastructure constitute a global system where traditional   borders do not apply.
Not only are our companies and networks global, but so are our  adversaries’.
This global attribute must be taken into consideration for any policy or  operational aspect of cybersecurity.
Further, if U.S. policies raise concern about the level of government engagement in  corporate networks or data, it will raise skepticism by global customers regarding the U.S.  government’s access to their corporate or consumer data and the implications of that access.
These  potential consequences may not be apparent in any particular policy, but that makes it even  more important that U.S. policy making consider the global impact of any proposed measure.
17      The partnership, which includes companies whose very existence demands a global  perspective, needs to be more fully utilized to ensure that global impacts are considered from  the beginning of a policy development process, whether in Congress or the Administration.
The partnership can also contribute to the international aspects of cybersecurity.
The interaction of US-CERT with its  counterpart computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs) helps foster that international  coordination.
We need to explore ways to integrate industry into those mechanisms as  appropriate to further collaborative action.
As part of an international strategy, the U.S. government needs to find ways to leverage  engagements with key allies and the global community (at varying degrees, as appropriate) to  collaborate on improving situational awareness, analysis, and response, containment, and  recovery measures.
Current government-to-government efforts could be bolstered by new  institutional arrangements or reduction of barriers to international coordination.
In addition,  such a strategy should articulate where in the international community the government should  engage and with what position(s), and the role or efforts of the agencies engaged to ensure a  consistent and coordinated approach.
Because of its international engagement, the private  sector has much to offer to these inter-government processes.
Given the importance of the global community in improving cybersecurity and critical   infrastructure protection, the international component should be part of our national strategy.
The CSPR specifically addresses this aspect and refers to the need to incorporate cybersecurity  in our global diplomatic efforts.
Not only can the U.S. reach out to global partners, but it can  also provide capacity building that enables those countries to take measurable steps to improve  their cybersecurity capabilities and become partners in the global effort to combat cyber  attacks and cybercrime.
In order to develop and implement a cybersecurity diplomacy strategy, government   needs to coordinate among its various components.
In that regard, we applaud recent  interagency coordination efforts and the establishment of a Coordinator for Cyber Issues to  lead the Department of State’s engagement on cybersecurity.
There needs to be an early and  ongoing partnership in order for both government and industry to leverage expertise,  experience, insight, and relationships toward greater collaboration and success in the  international environment.
The global approach should include ways to foster even greater  cooperation among law enforcement to more effectively pursue and prosecute cyber criminals.
18         Recommendation: Industry and government need to engage in international organizations and  standards-making processes and work together to develop a strategy for engagement, capacity  building, and collaboration on issues of global concern.
V.   SUPPLY CHAIN SECURITY   Supply chain security is critical to cybersecurity.
Without appropriate assurance that   technology products and services are not counterfeits, are reasonably free from intentional and  unintentional vulnerabilities, are appropriate to the level of threats they face once deployed,  and are correctly configured and maintained, there can be little confidence that the  information and communications they process and store are safe and secure.
Supply chain security is another area of cybersecurity policymaking and operations that  requires that both government and industry leverage international industry best practices and  standards, as well as work in a close public-private partnership.
We believe such a partnership  is needed to assure appropriate levels of security in the supply chain while transcending  national boundaries, being economically practical, and including appropriate market incentives.
As information technology is developed on a global basis, our approach to supply chain security  must also be global.
Potential risks differ across sectors and throughout the development life cycle.
Therefore, each actor in the life cycle has different risk management responsibilities.
Technology suppliers have a responsibility to develop and deliver solutions that meet  the needs of their global customer base and are worthy of its trust.
To this end, the providers  have contributed to the development of a wide spectrum of best practices and standards, as  well as their own company-specific practices and controls.
Standards for assurance are developed through a multi-stakeholder international   partnership framework rather than setting country-specific assurance standards, the  government should expand its participation in the international standards-setting  process;   ?
The public-private partnership should also facilitate the identification and   dissemination of effective international assurance standards and best practices.
19      The principal international standard for product assurance is ISO 15408, also known as   the Common Criteria.
There is a robust network of independent evaluation labs that are  accredited under the standard to conduct product reviews that are mutually recognized under  the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement (CCRA), and product evaluations are accepted  in more than twenty countries.
In its current form, the Common Criteria has been mostly applied to critical products  that perform security functions.
In addition, the timeframes associated with achieving the certification are often not  compatible with current market demands for product development.
Additionally, the partnership should examine industry engineering best practices to see how  they may be applicable in any additional framework for products that are not as critical as to  warrant the use of Common Criteria.
NIST should work with industry and other agencies to  undertake this examination.
Any other framework developed should be consistent with and  complementary to the Common Criteria.
Finally, as recommended by the CSPR, the government can make another contribution  to the supply chain security efforts of technology providers by sharing specific and actionable  threat information with them, to help them address such threats and improve their supply  chain and technology design and development processes.15   Acquirers of technology also have an important role to play.
The selection of specific   supply chain risk management practices varies depending on the role of the IT system and how  critical the IT element is within the system.
Technology acquirers need to evaluate their  suppliers’ practices on the basis of recognized industry standards and best practices.
They also  have a responsibility to follow recognized best practices as they configure, integrate, deploy,  and maintain technology solutions.
Acquirers of technology should actively leverage tools and resources available to ensure  that they do not acquire counterfeit technology products.
The government should work in close partnership with  industry to establish best practices that ensure the acquisition, integration, implementation,  and use of genuine and legitimate products throughout the life cycle of systems.
This includes                                                               15 Obama Administration, Cyberspace Policy Review – Assuring a Trusted and Resilient  Information and Communications Infrastructure, May 2009 at 35.
20      leveraging commercial anti-piracy and anti-counterfeiting technologies and processes and  putting in place more rigorous requirements for the government to purchase only from  authorized dealers and resellers.
Providers of technology products and services implement a wide spectrum of   international standards and best practices, as well as company-specific practices and controls  so that their technology solutions deliver appropriate levels of security.
Mandating country- specific, government-created risk management practices limits the user’s access to cutting-edge  technologies, causing several negative effects:   ?
A lack of measurable increases in security.
For example, government has made   attempts to require technology providers to share information that contains  intellectual property and other trade secrets.
Few if any acquirers have the  appropriate level of technical expertise to make decisions based on such  information, while suppliers would experience significant harm if that information’s  confidentiality was compromised.
Government mandates evolve at a slower pace than technology; therefore, they  compromise innovation by freezing design, development, and supply chain risk  management practices in time and hampering related economic growth.
Disparate and redundant government requirements regarding supply chain security   would weaken security, because resources that would otherwise go to improving  security would be assigned instead to complying with multiple standards.
Mandates that are fundamentally at odds with recognized industry best practices   and international standards restrict companies that build solutions for a global  marketplace.
They would also open the door  to imposition of other, divergent requirements by foreign governments.
Recommendation:  The government should expand its participation in the international system  that develops supply chain security standards and work with industry to identify and  disseminate them.
Government should then leverage those standards when it acquires  technology and take steps to prevent its acquisition of counterfeit technology products.
INNOVATION AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT   Cybersecurity is a fast-paced race in which malicious cyber actors constantly adapt their  tactics and tools.
Cybersecurity policy      21      should therefore maximize the ability of organizations to develop and adopt the widest possible  choice of cutting edge cybersecurity solutions.
An effective way to do this is through the  creation and implementation of a National Cybersecurity R&D Plan.
Currently, federal cybersecurity R&D efforts are conducted under the Federal Plan for   Cybersecurity and Information Assurance Research and Development (CSIA), which was  established under the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development  Program.
CSIA plan’s effectiveness can be improved by using public-private partnership  mechanisms to define, as well as pursue, national objectives.16    A National Cybersecurity R&D Plan needs to be created and must have the following:   ?
National-level objectives—The Plan’s objectives must be established on the basis of   a truly comprehensive and holistic view of the cybersecurity needs of the nation.
Unlike the CSIA plan, the National Plan should not be principally based on the needs  of the federal agencies that fund or conduct cybersecurity R&D, because their  aggregation, although valuable, does not produce a cohesive picture of the nation’s  overall R&D needs.
Simply put, the National  Plan should not be just a government one: the definition and prioritization of  national objectives require that a wide community of public and private partners  play an integral role from the earliest stages of the process and throughout the  creation of the Plan, as well as when the Plan’s objectives and implementation  activities are reviewed.
As a general rule, we recommend that the government focus its own cybersecurity  R&D efforts – which it would undertake under the Plan – on long-term and basic  research.
It is appropriate for the government to be involved in applied R&D if the  technological solution that is sought is not commercially available, and its absence                                                                16 Most of these recommendations were made to the Science and Technology Committee of the U.S. House of  Representatives, and were incorporated by the Committee in sections 103 and 108 of H.R.
4061, the Cybersecurity  Enhancement Act of 2010, which was adopted by the House on February 4, 2010.
22      creates a measurable security gap.
Federal agencies should be required to ascertain,  in collaboration with the private sector, whether commercial solutions exist or could  be readily adapted, before they invest in an R&D project to develop equivalent  capabilities.
By leveraging new and existing cybersecurity technologies, in addition  to research and development, the government will be able to better utilize its  limited resources.
Regular review by the partners—Innovation in information technology and   cybersecurity evolves rapidly.
Perhaps one of the key deficiencies of the CSIA plan is that it lacks a road map for its   implementation.
The National  Cybersecurity R&D Plan must have an implementation road map that:   ?
Is detailed: the Plan’s road map must determine which partners, be they federal  agencies, academia or industry, are responsible for what R&D projects, along with  specific timelines, desired outcomes and assigned resources.
Addresses industry’s role and government’s role in its implementation: the   cybersecurity R&D efforts that industry undertakes, with or without federal support  and funding, should be an integral part of the Plan’s road map.
Congress should  explore ways to make industry participation in federally funded cybersecurity R&D  more attractive, by improving the ownership or licensing of intellectual property (IP)  it generates.
The federal government  should also improve its sharing of the innovations generated by cybersecurity R&D  conducted by federal agencies.
Too often, those innovations are not shared with  industry, even though they could benefit the Nation as a whole through production  with licensing conditions that appropriately reward the agency in question.
The threat and technology landscape changes  rapidly.
An annual review of the objectives and the effectiveness of the related  implementation activities is also recommended.
23      Recommendation:  The public-private partnership should be used to create a genuine National  Cybersecurity Research and Development Plan with prioritized, national-level objectives and a  detailed road map that specifies the respective roles of each partner.
The plan and its  implementation road map should be regularly reviewed by the partners and adjusted as  necessary.
He called for a national public awareness and education  initiative to promote Internet security.
The President said, “It’s the great irony of our  Information Age—the very technologies that empower us to create and to build also empower  those who would disrupt and destroy.” However, a May 2010 poll conducted by two leading  Internet security education and awareness organizations found that the vast majority of  Americans are willing to practice good Internet safety and security habits given the right  resources.17 Americans feel that doing their part to help keep the Internet safe benefits their  homes and businesses as well as our national and economic security.
The public-private  partnership is strengthened through policies that help educate people about cybersecurity risks  and countermeasures that they can implement to better protect themselves.
The partnership is  also strengthened through policies that assist cybersecurity professionals to voluntarily improve  their skills.
Connect.” is a new public-private education and awareness   campaign to help people stay safer and more secure online.
Connect.” seeks to achieve for online safety and  security awareness what Smokey Bear does to prevent wildfires and “Click It or Ticket” does for  seatbelt safety.
We recommend heeding the 2009 example of  government and industry mobilization to halt the spread of the H1N1 flu.
An array of media (TV, the workplace, and social media,  among others) was used to provide public education and simple recommendations to control  infections.
This  collaborative effort could serve as a model for cybersecurity education and awareness.
17 See August 10, 2010, press release by the National Cyber Security Alliance and the Anti-Phishing Working Group,  available at: http://staysafeonline.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=62      24      This campaign could be strengthened by also emphasizing a holistic “people, process   and technology” approach to cybersecurity, rather than focusing solely on the user.
This would  include education about new cybersecurity technologies and the importance of regularly  applying security patches to systems.
While much attention has rightfully focused on educating consumers and youth, an   educational effort aimed at building awareness among business owners, managers, and  employees that cybersecurity is an enterprise risk management issue needs to be further  developed and communicated through the partnership.
A view of cybersecurity solely as an IT  problem masks the larger financial risks cyber vulnerabilities hold for the entire enterprise and  could result in under-investing in cybersecurity.
However, businesses can substantially reduce  the negative consequences of a successful cyber incident through risk management across the  entire organization.
Promotion of ongoing employee evaluations regarding cybersecurity  awareness and cybersecurity policy compliance is needed.
The interconnectedness of computers and networks in cyberspace means that the  public and private sectors share responsibility for promoting security as an enterprise-level  objective.
The CSPR captures this point succinctly: “It is not enough for the information  technology workforce to understand the importance of cybersecurity; leaders at all levels of  government and industry need to be able to make business and investment decisions based on  knowledge of risks and potential impacts.”   A goal of the partnership should be to increase the pool of cyber professionals available   to the public and private sectors, including fostering policies that add to the number of U.S.  science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) college students graduating  annually, to tackle our major cybersecurity challenge.
Recommendation: The public-private partnership should enhance cybersecurity public  awareness and education, and increase the number of cyber professionals available to both  government and business, including through policies that boost the number of science,  technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) college students graduating each year.
A strong framework for promoting cybersecurity through a  public-private partnership is already in place, and industry and government have devoted  substantial resources to it.
This would be a setback for cybersecurity.
Rather, industry and government must both do more to implement the existing partnership  model and meet the growing threat that cybersecurity represents.
This White Paper presents a  number of measures carefully targeted at existing problems.
Adopting these measures would  enhance the effectiveness of the public-private partnership.
We look forward to working with  the Executive branch and with Congress to implement these recommendations to promote  cybersecurity, spur innovation, and protect privacy.
Public–private partnerships in   national cyber-security strategies  MADELINE CARR  Cyber security is emerging as one of the most challenging aspects of the infor- mation  age  for  policy-makers  and  scholars  of  International  Relations  (IR).
It  has implications for national security, the economy, human rights, civil liberties  and international legal frameworks.
Although politicians have been aware of the  threats of cyber insecurity since the early years of internet technology,1 anxiety  about  the  difficulties  in  resolving  or  addressing  them  has  increased  rather  than  abated.2 In response, governments have begun to develop national cyber-security  strategies to outline the ways in which they intend to address cyber insecurity.
In the United States and United Kingdom,  the public–private partnership has repeatedly been referred to as the ‘cornerstone’  or ‘hub’ of cyber-security strategy.3  While  public–private  partnerships  have  often  been  developed  as  an  appro- priate means to address both non-traditional and traditional security threats,4 in  the context of national cyber security this arrangement is uniquely problematic.
The reluctance of politicians to claim authority for the state to intro- duce tougher cyber-security measures by law, coupled with the private sector’s  aversion  to  accepting  responsibility  or  liability  for  national  security,  leaves  the  ‘partnership’ without clear lines of responsibility or accountability.
Questions are  now being raised (by, among others, President Obama) about the efficacy of a  market-driven approach to cyber security, though in liberal democratic states at   1  William J. Clinton, A National Security Strategy for a new century (Washington DC: The White House, Oct.   2  Barack Obama, ‘Remarks by the President on securing our nation’s cyber infrastructure’ (Washington DC:   1998), p. 17.
3  William J. Clinton, National Plan for Information Systems Protection Version 1.0: an invitation to a dialogue (Wash- ington DC: The White House, 2000); George W. Bush, The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (Washington  DC: The White House, 2003); Francis Maude, The UK Cyber Security Strategy: protecting and promoting the UK  in a digital world (London: Cabinet Office, 2011).
4  Max  G.  Manwaring,  ‘The  new  global  security  landscape:  the  road  ahead’,  Low  Intensity  Conflict  and  Law  Enforcement 11: 2–3, Winter 2002, pp.
190–209; Barack Obama, US National Security Strategy (Washington DC:  The White House, 2012).
International Affairs 92: 1 (2016) 43–62 © 2016 The Author(s).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
least, any alternative has yet to emerge.5 Crucially for IR scholars, questions arise  here  about  the  extent  to  which  the  state  can  be  seen  to  be  abdicating  not  just  authority but responsibility for national security.
As Dunn Cavelty and Suter point  out in their article on this topic, ‘generating security for citizens is a core task  of the state; therefore it is an extremely delicate matter for the government to  pass on its responsibility in this area to the private sector’.6 Essentially, this raises  questions  about  how  well  the  state  is  equipped  to  provide  national  security  in  this context and about how existing policies and practices of national security are  being challenged by this new threat conception.
This article develops a comprehensive understanding of how policy-makers  and the private sector are conceptualizing their respective roles in national cyber  security, where there may be disparity in these conceptions and what implica- tions this may have for national and international cyber security.
It  then  analyses  the  conceptions of security that are evident in these policy documents.
Unpacking  the assumptions about security that drive these policies is essential to developing  an understanding of the goals, objectives and embedded interests that shape the  partnership.
Disjuncture  in  such  relationships  is  certainly  not  unique to this context, but the particular significance here arises from the fact  that what is at stake is not (for example) a civil engineering project but a national  security concern.
The conclusion is not that no kind of public–private partnership  can be central to national security in the US and UK, but rather that the partner- ship  referred  to  in  the  policy  documents  is  deeply  flawed  and  that,  unless  the  problems identified here are acknowledged and addressed, it is unlikely that this  arrangement will prove a durable or effective means of promoting national cyber  security.
Those examined in the  course of the research underlying this article include Austria, Australia, Canada,  the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary, India, Japan, Lithuania,  the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Slovak Republic, South Africa, the United  Kingdom and the United States.
The US is an essential case because it is here that  cyber-security strategies based on the public–private partnership were developed   5  Obama, ‘Remarks by the President on securing our nation’s cyber infrastructure’.
6  Myriam  Dunn  Cavelty  and  Manuel  Suter,  ‘Public–private  partnerships  are  no  silver  bullet:  an  expanded  governance model for critical infrastructure protection’, International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection  2: 4, 2009, p. 181.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
Over the ensuing 15 years, the public–private  partnership has been described by successive US presidents as the ‘cornerstone’  of national cyber security, though none has yet explicitly defined the parame- ters,  extent  or  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the  parties.
The  purpose of looking closely at two states with similar approaches, similar security  cultures and close ties between their intelligence communities, commercial sectors  and  defence  relations  is  to  look  for  subtle  differences.
It is anticipated that this research may provide a foundation for  further work in this area (a point to which I return below).
It should be noted also that the public–private partnership in national cyber  security is multifaceted.
Governments have diverse relations with internet service  providers (ISPs), multinational information corporations (Google, Facebook, etc.
In the  course of doing so, it becomes clear that despite this complexity and diversity, the  core focus in the strategies (and consequently in this article) is on the relationship  between the government and the owners/operators of critical infrastructure—the  rationale being that, while the many other aspects of cyber security are regarded  as linked to the national interest, critical infrastructure protection is unequivocally  and intrinsically linked to national security.
A  number  of  informal  interviews  were  conducted  for  this  research  over  an  18-month period.
Representatives from the British and American public sector  entities responsible for national cyber security were asked to comment on how  effective they felt the public–private partnership was in terms of critical infrastruc- ture protection, what problems they had observed with it and how they thought  it  might  be  improved.
Interviews  were  also  conducted  with  representatives  of  the  private  sector  in  the  UK  and  US,  with  a  particular  concentration  on  two  specific sectors: those working for critical infrastructure owners and operators,  and  those  working  for  private  cyber-security  firms.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
In order to develop our understanding of  the implications for International Relations of the public–private partnership in  cyber security, it would be illuminating to extend this research project to look at  a very different case-study.
China is a major power in global cyber security, and  differs markedly from the US and UK in both the relationship between its public  and  private  sectors  and  its  ownership  of  critical  infrastructure.
Having  looked  closely at these two similar states to discern the distinctive nuances in their respec- tive approaches, it would be useful to conduct the same study in China in order to  extend the analysis of potential implications for global security in the twenty-first  century.
Background to the public–private partnership in national cyber-security  strategy Dunn Cavelty and Brunner have observed that one of the dominant arguments in  the literature on the implications of the information age for international politics  is that ‘technological development enhances two trends that diminish the impor- tance of the state, both of which have implications for security: increasing interna- tionalisation and increasing privatisation’.7 These two trends unite in the approach  of the US and UK to national cyber security, and become manifest in the form  of the public–private partnership.
Understanding the history and background to  this approach is important in providing context for the tensions now evident in  this partnership, because these tensions embody a whole set of beliefs about the  respective roles of the state and of the private sector, and about the interrelation- ship between economic promotion and national security.
An  important  catalyst  for  this  trajectory  can  be  traced  back  to  the  end  of  the  Cold  War,  which  ‘decreased  the  demand  for  defense  research  and  made  national  security  a  less  compelling  reason  to  support  [technology  research  and  development]’.8 President Clinton’s foreign policy and economic policy were to  form a close and symbiotic (although not always comfortable) relationship as his  ideas about democratic enlargement through trade, the promotion of human rights,  and globalizing and liberating markets combined to form a kind of ideological/ economic grand strategy.9 Clinton was in favour of spending the ‘peace dividend’,   7  Myriam Dunn Cavelty and Elgin M. Brunner, ‘Introduction: information, power, and security—an outline  of debates and implications’, in Myriam Dunn Cavelty, Victor Mauer and Sai Felicia Krishna-Hensel, eds,  Power and security in the information age: investigating the role of the state in cyberspace (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007), pp.
8  Joseph E. Stiglitz and Scott J. Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships: promises and pitfalls’, Ameri-  can Behavioral Scientist 43: 35, Sept. 1999, p. 57.
9  In  September  1993,  President  Clinton  gave  a  speech  to  the  UN  General  Assembly  outlining  this  strategic  framework, which was reiterated in several subsequent speeches by senior officials including the Secretary  of State and the National Security Advisor: William J. Clinton, ‘Remarks to the 48th Session of the United   46  Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
and  by  1992  he  was  explicit  about  how  it  should  be  applied:  ‘Every  dollar  we  take out of military R&D [research and development] in the post-Cold War era  should go to R&D for commercial technologies, until civilian R&D can match  and eventually surpass our Cold War military R&D commitment.’10 Stiglitz and  Wallsten write that these conditions ‘led to a new push for public–private partner- ships intended to support commercial [technology research and development]’.11  Much  of  the  groundwork  for  these  partnerships  was  laid  in  the  1980s,  but  the  Clinton administration made them ‘the centrepiece of its technology program’.12  It was in this climate that the Clinton–Gore administration invested so heavily  in internet technology.
The  new  administration  believed  that  ‘only the private sector has the skills and abilities to manage the complex process  of  developing  new  technologies  and  bringing  them  to  market,  while  ...  [the]  government  plays  a  vital  role  in  enabling  the  private  sector’s  efforts’.13  By  the  mid-1980s,  the  internet  infrastructure  was  fiscally  supported  and  administered  by  the  federal  government  through  the  National  Science  Foundation  (NSF),  though this was regarded by the government as an interim measure on the way  to  full  private  ownership  and  management.14  The  National  High-Performance  Computing Act of 1990 specified that the NSF was to support the establishment of  a high-speed national network ‘in a manner which fosters and maintains competi- tion and private sector investment in high speed data networking’,15 and that the  involvement of the NSF ‘be phased out when commercial networks can meet the  networking needs of American researchers’.16  A  number  of  policy  initiatives  focused  on  stimulating  private-sector  invest- ment as well as the development of network management capability.
This policy dictated that network traffic should be restricted to ‘open  research  and  education’,  specifically  prohibiting  commercial  activity  until  such  time as the infrastructure was privatized.17 Through this ‘carrot and stick’ policy  Nations General Assembly’, New York, 27 Sept. 1993; Anthony Lake, ‘From containment to enlargement’,  speech to the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies, Washington DC, 21 Sept.  1993; Warren Christopher, ‘Building peace in the Middle East’, speech at Columbia University, 20 Sept. 1993.
10  William J. Clinton, remarks at Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 16   April 1992, http://www.ibiblio.org/nii/econ-posit.html, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.
11  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
12  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
13  Technology  in  the  National  Interest  (Washington  DC:  NSTC  Committee  on  Civilian  Industrial  Technology,   1996), p. 42, cited in Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 63.
14  For an account of how the funding was organized in 1990, see Brian Kahin, ‘RFC1192—commercialization of  the internet, summary report’, issued as a ‘request for comments’ by the Network Working Group, Harvard  University, Nov. 1990, http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1192.html, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.
The Federal Research Internet Coordinating Committee, established to coordinate networking  research activities, issued a report in 1989 stating that the network would ‘be implemented and operated so  that [it] can become commercialized’: Federal Research Internet Coordinating Committee, Program plan for  the National Research and Education Network (Washington DC, 23 May 1989), pp.
17  For background on this, see the NSF website, ‘The internet: changing the way we communicate’, http://  www.nsf.gov/about/history/nsf0050/internet/internet.htm, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
approach,  the  government  sought  to  stimulate  necessary  private-sector  invest- ment—and indeed, this policy did have the intended effect.18  The public–private partnership is not, of course, unique to cyber security.
It  has been employed widely by states including the US and UK as a mechanism to  deal with a range of other issues, including security-related ones.
The practice  intensified from the 1990s, when the privatization of critical infrastructure was  regarded as economically beneficial to the state, freeing up capital and drawing  more heavily on the efficiencies and business practices of the private sector.
In the  wake of this shift, an extensive body of literature developed that examines the  public–private partnership in all kinds of contexts.
It deals with the background  of these partnerships,19 the range of different approaches,20 how to measure success  and failure,21 and how responsibility and authority are delegated.22 There has also  been some examination of the public–private partnership in cyber security, most  notably by Dunn Cavelty and Suter, but this focuses on ways to improve it rather  than  critically  analysing  its  political  implications.23  Combined,  this  literature  provides a solid foundation for the present research project, proving particularly  useful in highlighting the ways in which this partnership is distinct but also in  outlining common assumptions and expectations that run through public–private  partnerships more generally.
Although they are often portrayed as a ‘new’ management  approach designed to blend the best of both sectors, examples of public–private  partnerships have been traced back to biblical times.24 Without going back quite  so far, Wettenhall uses the example of Drake’s fleet which defeated the Spanish  Armada in the sixteenth century, highlighting the fact that most of the ships were  privately owned and operated though they were serving under contract to the   18  See  NSF  website,  http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/nsf50/nsfoutreach/htm/n50_z2/pages_z3/28_pg.htm;  also  Barry M. Leiner, Vinton G. Cerf, David D. Clark, Robert E. Kahn, Leonard Kleinrock, Daniel C. Lynch,  Jon Postel, Larry G. Roberts and Stephen Wolff, ‘A brief history of the internet, part 1’, On the Internet (The  Internet Society), May–June 1997, http://www.isoc.org/oti/articles/0597/leiner.html (both accessed 4 Nov.  2015).
35–51; Roger Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of  public–private partnerships’, Public Organization Review: A Global Journal 3: 1, 2003, pp.
20  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, pp.
21  Graeme A. Hodge and Carsten Greve, ‘Public–private partnerships: an international performance review’,  Public Administration Review 67: 3, May–June 2007, pp.
545–58; Michael J. Garvin and Doran Bosso, ‘Assessing  the effectiveness of infrastructure public–private partnership programs and projects’, Public Works Management  and Policy 13: 2, Oct. 2008, pp.
22  Nutavoot Pongsiri, ‘Regulation and public–private partnerships’, International Journal of Public Sector Manage- ment 15: 6, 2002, pp.
487–95; Marco Schaferhoff, Sabine Campe and Christopher Kaan, ‘Transnational public– private partnerships in International Relations: making sense of concepts, research frameworks, and results’,  International Studies Review 11: 3, Sept. 2009, pp.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
Admiralty,  to  demonstrate  that  the  practice  of  governments  cooperating  with  private actors has a long historical pedigree.25 What appears to be ‘new’ is the  discourse around it, which Reijniers argues has reflected trends in management  reform from the early 1990s that saw a turn away from ‘leadership and behavioural  principles and toward more structural emphases on flexibility and innovation— reinforcing  partnership  ideals’.26 Linder  sees  the  growing  discourse  on  partner- ships as a retreat from the ‘hard-line advocacy of privatization’ of the Reagan and  Thatcher years.27 From this perspective, he argues, they are accommodationist;  ‘they hold back the spectre of wholesale divestiture and, in exchange, promise  lucrative collaboration with the state’.28 Wettenhall also points out that the term  has  a  positive  relationship  with  the  discourse  on  ‘third  way’  economics  and  is  associated with expectations of ‘mutual obligation and trust’.29  All of this suggests a discursive and practical breaking down of boundaries or  borders at a domestic level which, of course, is very much in keeping with the  broader discourse around the internet.
The observation by Hess and Adams that  public–private partnerships emerge from ‘loss of faith in both state and market’  can go some way to explaining this discursive and policy shift.30 Despite the fact  that internet technology was heavily supported and promoted by the US govern- ment (and indeed, the private sector had to be pressured to some extent to take it  over), there quickly developed a kind of expectation that governments had only a  limited role to play in further development of the technology.
However, Wetten- hall argues that there is a persistent lack of precision in how the term ‘partnership’  is employed, and ‘belief that what it refers to is “a good” thing seems much more  a matter of faith than of science’.31  What is meant by ‘cyber security’?
Just as in the 19th century we had to secure the seas for our national safety and prosperity,  and in the 20th century we had to secure the air, in the 21st century we also have to secure  our position in cyber space.32 ‘Cyber  security’  is  almost  as  broad  and  indistinct  a  term  as  ‘security’  itself;  and  there  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  this.
First,  the  implications  of  internet  technology are highly diverse because they penetrate many critical systems and  practices on multiple levels.
Cyber security is used to refer to the integrity of our  personal privacy online, to the security of our critical infrastructure, to electronic   25  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’, p. 92.
A.  M.  Reijniers,  ‘Organization  of  public–private  partnership  projects’,  International  Journal  of  Project  Management 12: 3, 1994, pp.
32  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom: safety, security and resilience in cyber space (London: Cabinet Office,   June 2009), p. 5.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
These  areas range extremely widely, and are united only by the technology with which  they engage.
This of course, is also a problem with ‘security’ that has been recog- nized by scholars in IR for many years.33 In order to arrive at some clarity about  what cyber security means in the context of national cyber-security strategies, it  is useful to turn to the three fundamental questions that guide those working in  many areas of security studies: for whom?
When  these national cyber-security strategy documents refer to ‘cyber security’, whose  security are they referring to?
Cyber security for whom?
The  referent  object  in  these  strategy  documents  is  typically  ‘the  state’,  which  in turn is conceived of as comprising three main component parts: individuals,  businesses and the internet itself.
The interests of the  individual are generally conflated with those of the state—a common approach  to security in international relations that is being challenged now by concepts of  ‘human security’—according to which what is ‘best’ for the state is, by definition,  best for individual citizens.
The state exists to pursue security and, by doing so,  ensures that it can provide for and protect individuals.
There are some references  in the strategy documents that acknowledge that state security interests do not  always align with individual security interests.
These take the form of norma- tive statements or principles about simultaneously pursuing greater cyber security  and also upholding values of privacy and civil liberties (a tension that has been  of particular pertinence since the Edward Snowden case of 2013).
The 2003 US  National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace states that cyber security and personal  privacy need not be opposing goals and that the federal government should ‘lead  by example in implementing strong privacy policies and practices’.34 The 2009 UK  strategy is somewhat more forthright about the intention to exploit opportunities  for data gathering35 in balance with civil liberties and privacy, upon which ‘our  freedoms depend ... and which form the basis of our society’.36 The individual’s  cyber security, then, is important at a profound societal level—but may have to  be subsumed into broader collective state concerns.
The importance of the internet to national economies makes the business sector  a  key  focus  in  these  strategies.
In  any  analysis  of  how  politicians  regard  cyber  security  as  a  problem  for  US  power,  economic  factors  feature  significantly.37  33  Peter Burgess, ed., The Routledge handbook of new security studies (London and New York: Routledge, 2010).
34  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, pp.
35  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, pp.
36  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 10.
37  Senator Daniel Akaka referred to the internet as the ‘backbone of the US economy’ in a statement at ‘Securing  cyberspace: efforts to protect national information infrastructures continue to face challenges’, hearing before  the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the Subcommittee on Federal Finan-  50  Madeline CarrInternational Affairs 92: 1, 2016Copyright © 2016 The Author(s).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
Indeed,  in  a  2009  speech  entitled  ‘Securing  our  nation’s  cyber  infrastructure’,  President Obama stated definitively that ‘America’s economic prosperity in the  21st century will depend on cybersecurity’.38 In the ‘landscape review’ of the UK  cyber-security strategy, Amyas Morse makes the point that if the internet were  a national economy, it would be the fifth largest in the world.39 In addition, he  writes, the UK has one of the world’s largest online economies, with 8 per cent  of GDP generated online—a higher proportion than for any other G20 country.40  To this end, the UK national Cyber Security Strategy specifically addresses the  financial cost to businesses of security breaches.41 Intellectual property is also a  key concern for the business sector; the US Cyberspace Policy Review quotes a  2008 estimate that set the value of losses due to data theft as high as $1 trillion.42 Protecting the state also means ensuring the integrity and smooth functioning  of  the  internet  itself  because  so  many  other  systems  rely  upon  it.
The  Obama  administration’s first National Security Strategy in 2010 elevated the internet to  the position of ‘strategic national asset’ and declared that protecting it was now a  ‘national security priority’.43 The UK Cyber Security Strategy states that it is the  ‘effective functioning of cyber space’ that is of vital importance.44 This introduces  some  conflation  of  ideas  about  cyber  security,  because  in  addition  to  being  an  object to be protected, the internet is also, of course, the source of threats (from  what?)
However, it is clear in these strategies that the network itself is a primary  referent object for conceptions of security.
It is the security of the technology itself,  as well as the security of those who use the technology, that concerns the US  and UK governments here; and the two forms of security are linked.
‘Citizens,  business and government can enjoy the full benefits of a safe, secure and resilient  cyber space.’45 The technology becomes an artefact to be protected, an asset essen- tial to broader state security.
Is it individuals—and, if so,  what happens when the state itself is perceived as the threat to security, as it was  for some in the context of the Prism/Tempora programme?46 If businesses are to   cial Management, Government Information, and International Security, US Senate, 19 July 2005, p. 5.
In a  similar context, Representative Tom Davis called the internet the ‘central backbone of our global economy’  in his statement at ‘Computer security: cyber attacks: war without borders’, hearing before the Committee  on Government Reform, US House of Representatives, 26 July 2000, p. 6.
38  Obama, ‘Remarks by the President on securing our nation’s cyber infrastructure’.
39  David Dean, Sebastian Digrande, Dominic Field, Andreas Lundmark, James O’Day, John Pineda and Paul  Zwillenberg, The Internet economy in the G-20: the $4.2 trillion growth opportunity (Boston Consulting Group,  March 2012), available online at http://www.bcg.com/documents/file100409.pdf , cited in Amyas Morse, The  UK Cyber Security Strategy: landscape review (London: House of Commons, 11 Feb. 2013), p. 5.
40  Morse, The UK Cyber Security Strategy, p. 5.
41  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 12.
42  Melissa Hathaway, Cyberspace policy review: assuring a trusted and resilient information and communications infrastruc-  ture (Washington DC: The White House, May 2009), p. 2.
43  Barack Obama, United States National Security Strategy (Washington DC: The White House, 2010), p. 27.
44  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 3.
45  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 3.
46  The  Prism  programme  refers  to  the  US  National  Security  Agency’s  practice  of  collecting  personal  data  through a range of online services like social media and search engines.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
be protected, we might expect a greater contribution from that sector to finance  national cyber security.
Or is national cyber security to be regarded as a business  subsidy?
And finally, if the protection of the network is also the object of the  strategies,  it  becomes  clear  that  conflicts  and  tensions  between  these  goals  are  likely to become manifest in any arrangements to achieve them.
Cyber security from what?
Critical infrastructure is  defined in the US as ‘systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to  the nation that their incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact on  national security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or  any combination of those matters’.48 The protection of critical infrastructure has  been linked to cyber security for the past 25 years, during which many advanced  industrialized states have privatized critical infrastructure systems such as water  and sewerage, electricity, finance, communications and transport.49 By the time  the new millennium arrived, some 85 per cent of US critical infrastructure was  in private hands.50 With privatization came an increased discretion on the part  of those managing the infrastructure in the choice of systems and technology to  control these utilities and industries, and many of them moved from proprietary   Edward Snowden in June 2013.
47  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, pp.
48  Gregory C. Wilshusen, ‘Cyber security: continued attention needed to protect our nation’s critical infra- structure and federal information systems’, testimony before the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastruc- ture Protection, and Security Technologies, Committee on Homeland Security, House of Representatives  (Washington DC: US Government Accountability Office, 16 March 2011), p. 2.
See Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure, ‘About CPNI: the  national infrastructure’, http://www.cpni.gov.uk/about/cni/, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.
49  Information Sharing Environment, ‘ISE’s participation in the Open Government initiative’, http://www.ise.
gov/open, accessed 4 Nov. 2015.
50  ‘Agency  response  to  cyberspace  policy  review’,  presented  to  the  Committee  on  Science  and  Technology,  Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation and Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, US  House of Representatives, 16 June 2009, p. 3.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
systems to more generic computer programs known as ‘supervisory control and  data acquisition systems’ (SCADA systems).
While SCADA systems boosted the  productivity and efficiency of many industries and services by allowing critical  infrastructure to be controlled centrally and remotely, the combination of private  ownership  and  the  vulnerabilities  of  SCADA  systems  led  to  a  range  of  cyber- security  concerns  around  critical  infrastructure  protection  when  these  systems  began to be connected to the internet.
An  attack  on  critical  infrastructure  remains  one  of  the  dominant  themes  of  debates about cyber insecurity in the US.
Critical infrastructure is typically discussed  in terms of ‘sectors’, and these come under the purview of government agencies  or departments.52 For the most part, the trend has been towards industry self- regulation, best practices and some coordination in terms of information-sharing  with the government.
Cyber security by what means?
What  is  of  interest  to  the  core  research objectives here is that two dominant lines of practice emerge in response  to the question: ‘By what means?’ First, as discussed briefly above, there is a persis- tent emphasis on remaining anchored in core values and norms that are believed to  underpin the national identity and power more broadly—what Hans Morgenthau  referred to as the ‘national character’.53 In the 2010 US National Security Strategy,  President Obama argued that: ‘Fidelity to our values is the reason why the United  States of America grew from a small string of colonies under the writ of an empire   51  Representative Bill Pascrell, prepared statement at ‘SCADA systems and the terrorist threat: protecting the  nation’s critical control systems’, joint hearing before the Subcommittee on Economic Security, Infrastructure  Protection, and Cybersecurity with the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Science, and Technology  of the Committee of Homeland Security on 18 Oct. 2005, p. 3.
They are: chemical,  commercial  facilities,  communications,  critical  manufacturing,  dams,  defense  industrial  base,  emergency  services, energy, financial services, food and agriculture, government facilities, healthcare and public health,  information technology, nuclear reactors materials and waste, transportation systems, and water and waste- water systems.
See Department of Homeland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/critical-infrastructure-sectors  (both accessed 4 Nov. 2015).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
to the strongest nation in the world.’54 And in the UK: ‘Our approach seeks to  preserve and protect the rights to which we are accustomed (including privacy and  civil liberties) because it is on these rights that our freedoms depend.’55  The second dominant line of practice articulated in these strategies that is of  consequence for the public–private partnership is information sharing.
Analysis of the public–private partnership in cyber security There are several reasons why cyber security, particularly in the context of critical  infrastructure  protection,  has  been  conceived  of  as  some  kind  of  collaborative  project for the public and private sectors.
The state is understood to be respon- sible for the provision of security, especially national security.
Protecting critical  infrastructure—those assets and systems necessary for the preservation of national  security (broadly defined)—is perceived as an integral part of providing security  to the state.
The potential implications of a large-scale cyber attack on critical  infrastructure are so extensive that it follows naturally that the government would  recognize some authority and responsibility here.
However, because most of the  critical  infrastructure  in  the  US  and  UK  is  privately  owned  and  operated,  by  definition there has to be some kind of relationship between the public and private  sectors in terms of the provision of security in this context.
Having  established  the  background  to  public–private  partnerships,  in  terms  of  both discourse and practice, it is necessary now to be clear about what exactly is  meant by the term in this particular context.
In examining these relationships, Wettenhall identifies two broad categories: (a)  horizontal, non-hierarchical arrangements characterized by consensual decision-  54  Obama, United States National Security Strategy, 2010, p. 35.
55  Cyber Security Strategy of the United Kingdom, p. 10.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
making; and (b) hierarchically organized relationships with one party in a control- ling role.
The implication is, he argues, that true ‘partnerships’ are of type (a) and  not type (b).56  This distinction has implications for the public–private partnership in cyber  security.
The UK Cyber Security  Strategy states that achieving the goal of a safe, secure internet will ‘require every- body, the private sector, individuals and government to work together.
Just as  we all benefit from the use of cyberspace, so we all have a responsibility to help  protect it.’57 With specific reference to the role of the private sector, it states that  there is an expectation that private-sector entities will ‘work in partnerships with  each other, Government and law enforcement agencies, sharing information and  resources, to transform the response to a common challenge, and actively deter  the threats we face in cyberspace’.58 This non-hierarchical language belies the poor  alignment of perceptions about the ‘common challenge’ and the ‘threats we face  in cyberspace’.
The private sector regards  cyber-security challenges as financial and reputational—not as a common public  good, which is how governments regard national cyber security.
In doing so, he draws out questions about their intended  purpose and significance as well as ‘what the relevant problems are to be solved and  how best to solve them’.59 Two of these ‘types’ can shed light on what is meant by  the public–private partnership in cyber security: partnership as management reform  and partnership as power sharing.
Linder argues that partnership as management reform refers to the expectation that  government managers will learn ‘by emulating their partners’ and shift their focus  from  administrative  processes  to  deal-making  and  attracting  capital  in  a  more  entrepreneurial and flexible approach.60 Significantly, this is regarded as one of  the objectives of the partnership, because of the belief that the market is inher- ently superior and ‘its competitive character stimulates innovation and creative  problem solving’—a view embedded in neo-liberalism.61  Perhaps  not  surprisingly,  although  this  is  reflected  in  the  strategies  of  both  states,  it  is  much  more  pronounced  in  the  US  documents.
The  Bush  adminis- tration’s  National  Strategy  to  Secure  Cyberspace  argued  that  in  the  US  ‘tradi- tions of federalism and limited government require that organizations outside the  federal government take the lead’ in cyber security.62 This interpretation of the  56  Wettenhall, ‘The rhetoric and reality of public–private partnerships’, p. 90.
57  UK Cyber Security Strategy, p. 22.
58  UK Cyber Security Strategy, p. 23.
62  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, p. xiii.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
‘The federal government could not—and, indeed, should not—secure  the computer networks of privately owned banks, energy companies, transpor- tation firms, and other parts of the private sector.’63 This assertion is based on  the belief that ‘in general, the private sector is best equipped and structured to  respond to an evolving cyber threat’,64 and reflected in the statement by Attorney  General  Eric  Holder  that  decision-makers  in  the  US  ‘believe  strongly  that  the  private sector should take the lead in protecting private computer networks’.65 In  testimony before a hearing on internet security, the FBI’s Michael Vatis argued  that cyber security is ‘clearly the role of the private sector.
The Government has  neither the responsibility nor the expertise to act as the private sector’s system  administration.’66  There  is  a  rejection  here  of  government  liability  for  private  networks  that  is  framed  in  the  belief  that  the  government  has  neither  the  authority  nor  the  capability to deal with cyber security.
It is an approach in keeping with the partner- ship  as  management  reform  type  identified  by  Linder—though  the  government  rejects  the  objective  of  change  inherent  within  that  type.
First, it must accept responsibility and liability  for its own network security; and second, its superior capacity for flexibility and  innovation means that it is best placed to take the lead on this particular security  problem.
The problem, of course, is that some of these networks—particularly  with regard to critical infrastructure—are central to national security; and therein  lies the problem from the perspective of the private sector.
The private sector develops a cyber-security strategy within a very different  framework  from  the  government’s  ‘public  good’  conception.
First,  it  argues  that  the  expense  of  ensuring  cyber  security  to  a  national  security  level  would  be  significant;  second,  it  argues  that  the  litigious  nature  of (especially American) society means that industry would be very resistant to  accepting liability for the security of its products or systems.67  Stiglitz and Wallsten make some important observations about this dichoto- mized  approach  to  public–private  partnerships  in  the  context  of  technology  innovation.
‘Theory predicts,’ they argue, ‘and many empirical studies confirm,  that  profit-maximizing  firms  invest  less  than  the  socially  optimal  level  of   63  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, p. 11.
64  Bush, National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, p. 11.
65  Eric Holder Jr, Deputy Attorney General, US Department of Justice, prepared statement for ‘Internet Secu-  rity’, hearing on 8 March 2000, p. 12.
66  Michael A. Vatis, Deputy Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, National Infrastructure Protec-  tion Programs, prepared statement for ‘Internet security’, hearing on 8 March 2000, p. 26.
See also  Richard A. Clarke and Robert K. Knake, Cyber war: the next threat to national security and what to do about it (New  York: Ecco, 2010).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
[technology research and development].’68 What is in society’s best interest with  regard to cyber security is not always in the best interests of the private sector.
This  is  because,  they  argue,  social  benefits  do  not  translate  in  terms  of  private  profitability—no matter how desirable the outcome.69  Private-sector  owners  of  critical  infrastructure  accept  responsibility  for  securing their systems—to the point that it is profitable; that is, as far as the cost  of dealing with an outage promises to cost more than preventing it.
However,  they tend to make a distinction between protecting against low-level threats such  as ‘background noise, individual hackers, and possibly hacktivists’ and protecting  against an attack on the state (national security).70 In testimony at a US hearing  on privately owned critical infrastructure cyber security, one witness explained  that ‘it is industry’s contention that government should protect against the larger  threats—organized  crime,  terrorists,  and  nation-state  threats—either  through  law-enforcement or national defense’.71 We saw this distinction play out in the  2014 attack on Sony Pictures, where the focus on the likely source shifted from an  ‘insider threat’ attack (which the security community regarded as most likely72)  to a North Korean initiative in response to the release of a film about the fictional  assassination of Kim Jong Un.73  This disjuncture in perceptions is arguably at the heart of the tension in this  ‘partnership’.
It is difficult to ascribe  either of these rationales comprehensively in the single most emphasized practice  in  this  partnership—information  sharing.
Although  there  may  be  a  financial  component to information sharing (paying for intelligence on vulnerabilities and  attack vectors) and although there may also be some shared incentives, neither of  these adequately encompasses the dynamics of the public–private partnership in  this context.
Perhaps information sharing can best be understood in the second  of Stephen Linder’s ‘types’ of public–private partnerships—partnerships as power  sharing.
Linder writes that partnerships as power sharing are based on an ethos of cooperation  where ‘trust replaces the adversarial relations endemic to command-and-control  regulation’ and where there is some mutually beneficial sharing of responsibility,   68  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 53.
69  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 53.
wired.com/2014/12/evidence-of-north-korea-hack-is-thin/; Marc Rogers, ‘Why I still don’t think it’s likely  that North Korea hacked Sony’, Marc’s Security Ramblings, 21 Dec. 2014, http://marcrogers.org/2014/12/21/ why-i-still-dont-think-its-likely-that-north-korea-hacked-sony/; Bruce Schneier, ‘More data on attributing  the Sony attack’, Schneier on Security, 31 Dec. 2014, https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2014/12/more_ data_on_at.html (all accessed 4 Nov. 2015).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
The practice of information sharing as a partnership There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  main  expectation  of  cooperation  within  the  public–private partnership is found in the emphasis on information sharing.75 In  July 2010, the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) published a report  entitled Critical infrastructure protection, with the subtitle: Key private and public cyber  expectations need to be consistently addressed.76 The purpose of the study was to clarify  the  partnership  expectations  of  both  the  public  and  the  private  sectors  and  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  those  expectations  were  being  met.
This  study  was limited to five key critical infrastructure sectors deemed to be most reliant on  cyber security.77  The  provision  of  timely  and  actionable  cyber-threat  and  alert  information  emerges  as  a  key  expectation  of  the  partnership  from  both  the  public  and  the  private sector, but there are a number of obstacles to sharing information from  both perspectives.78 The private sector reports that it is not always easy to immedi- ately distinguish between some kind of technical problem, a low-level attack and  a large-scale sustainable attack.79 In addition, it sometimes runs counter to their  commercial interests to report vulnerabilities, particularly if understanding and  rectifying a problem before competitors become aware of it could offer a market  edge.80  Finally,  if  a  private  security  firm  shares  information  with  the  govern- ment about an attack, that information may be shared with its competitors.81 For  private-sector security firms, their business model is reliant on obtaining, holding  and selling information, not sharing it.82  The public sector also encounters limitations to sharing information.
Classi- fied contextual information cannot be shared with individuals who do not have  adequate security clearance.
Even those working in the private sector who do have  security clearance can often do nothing with classified information because to take   74  Linder, ‘Coming to terms with the public–private partnership’, p. 47.
76  David  A.  Powner,  Critical  infrastructure  protection:  key  private  and  public  cyber  expectations  need  to  be  consistently   addressed (Washington DC: Government Accountability Office, July 2010).
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
action on it would be to expose it.83 In addition, there is a high expectation that  threat information shared from the public to the private sector will be accurate,  and this leads to extensive and stringent review and revision processes that delay  the release of time-critical information.84 This problem of sharing information  has  persistently  been  regarded  as  a  key  impediment  to  cyber  security,  and  was  highlighted  by  a  senior  official  in  testimony  before  a  congressional  hearing  on  cyber security in 2011 as one of two main areas that needed improvement.85  Significantly,  private-sector  interviews  consistently  revealed  that  personal  relationships were central to effective information sharing.86 That is, people were  much more inclined to share information with colleagues with whom they had  a strong personal and/or professional bond.
This human factor is important and  should be further investigated in order to identify ways to establish and strengthen  these relationships in sectors of network security and the public service, which are  characterized by a relatively high turnover of staff.
She also identified a set of criteria for the measurement of success—some of which  are useful in relation to the case considered here, particularly accountability and  possible conflicts of interest.87  In  terms  of  conflict  of  interest,  Vaillancourt  Rosenau  makes  the  case  that  partnerships do not (as many assume) necessarily reduce regulation.
85  Wilshusen, ‘Cyber security’, p. 8.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
the intended delivery of service.88 Here we see the profile of one of the central  problems  of  this  public–private  partnership:  the  expectation  that  the  private  sector will invest in cyber security beyond its cost/benefit analysis to fully accom- modate the public interest—in other words, to ensure national security.
Because  market incentives are not adequate to promote this level of security, oversight  and some level of regulation are necessary.
A 2013 GAO report found that many  of the experts consulted argued that the private sector had not done enough to  protect critical infrastructure against cyber threats.89 The private sector explana- tion for not fully engaging in the government’s cyber-security strategy was that  the  government  had  failed  to  make  a  convincing  business  case  that  mitigating  threats warranted substantial new investment.90  Dunn Cavelty and Suter argue that while public–private cooperation is neces- sary,  the  way  it  is  organized  and  conceptualized  needs  to  be  rethought.
They  propose  to  do  so  through  governance  theory  and  they  find  that  critical  infra- structure protection policy ‘should be based as far as possible on self-regulating  and self-organising networks’.91 By this, they mean that ‘the government’s role no  longer consists of close supervision and immediate control, but of coordinating  networks and selecting instruments that can be used to motivate these networks  for CIP tasks’.92 This may provide some forward momentum, though Vaillancourt  Rosenau makes the point that a public–private partnership cannot be regarded as  a success if it ‘results in lower quality of public policy services, the need for more  government oversight, and the need for expensive monitoring, even if it appears  to reduce costs’.93 Perhaps more problematic for Dunn Cavelty and Suter’s recom- mendation is the question of accountability.
On  accountability,  Vaillancourt  Rosenau  writes  that  because  these  partner- ships often see policy decisions and practices that are normally reserved for elected  officials delegated to the private sector, accountability is essential to maintaining a  healthy democratic order.
If responsibility and accountability can be devolved to  private actors, the central principle that political leaders and governments are held  to account is undermined.94 For many scholars, to ensure effective accountability  in  a  public–private  partnership,  the  specifics  of  roles  and  responsibilities  must  be made clear at the outset and goals must be clearly articulated.95 Stiglitz and  Wallsten observe that in the process of doing this, it becomes clear when additional  incentives and resources are necessary to achieve agreed goals, and these must be  provided if accountability is to be sustained.96 In cases such as cyber security, in  which the end goal for government is the public good, accountability—like the   88  Vaillancourt Rosenau, ‘The strengths and weaknesses of public–private policy partnerships’, pp.
89  Gregory C. Wilshusen and Nabajyoti Barkakati, Cybersecurity: national strategy, roles, and responsibilities need to be   better defined and more effectively implemented (Washington DC: GAO, Feb. 2013), p. 49.
90  Wilshusen and Barkakati, Cybersecurity, p. 49.
95  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
96  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
alignment of interests discussed above—does not appear to emerge from market  forces  alone.97  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  public–private  partnerships  cannot  be successful when interests and objectives diverge; but, in the view of Stiglitz  and Wallsten, in these cases ‘more attention needs to be placed on the incentive- accountability structure’.98  The GAO report referred to above is also useful in analysing the key objec- tives  of  this  partnership  and  in  measuring  its  success.99 The  report  found  that  in  addition  to  information  sharing,  there  were  two  main  expectations  that  the  government holds of the private sector in this partnership.
In the face of the continuing challenge of concep- tualizing  cyber  security  within  a  national  security  framework,  this  article  has  argued  that  a  sensible  starting-point  would  be  to  speak  with  clarity  about  the  tensions and competing agendas that characterize the public–private partnership  (particularly  in  the  context  of  critical  infrastructure  protection)  rather  than  to  shroud them in normative ‘new management’ language.
98  Stiglitz and Wallsten, ‘Public–private technology partnerships’, p. 57.
International Affairs © 2016 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
has consistently (and perhaps understandably) expressed an aversion to accepting  responsibility or liability for national security and regards cyber security within  a  cost/benefit  framework  rather  than  a  ‘public  good’  framework.
While  this  article  does  not  argue  that  this latter type of regulation is necessarily the answer, it does point out why the  partnership arrangement cannot work effectively in its current form.
In  essence,  while  states  like  the  UK  and  the  US  are  relying  on  the  private  sector for a key element of national security, in the context of critical infrastruc- ture protection (a persistent and key concern for national cyber-security policy- makers)  this  entails  reliance  on  a  dysfunctional  partnership.
First—the core contribution of this article— the weaknesses in the partnership must be openly acknowledged so that we may  begin to develop mechanisms to address them.
Third, we  might begin to think more laterally about how cyber security fits within a national  security framework.
It might be more appropriate to develop a national cyber- resilience  strategy  instead  of  a  national  cyber-security  strategy.
Finally,  it  would  be useful to look more closely at how states that have retained public ownership  of critical infrastructure deal with cyber security in this context and how states  with more control over their private sector are addressing similar national cyber- security concerns.
In both the UK  and the US, we are witnessing a unique approach to ‘outsourcing’ national cyber  security, and this raises questions about how well the state is equipped to provide  this security and about how existing policies and practices of national security  are being challenged by this partnership for the provision of national security.
States with greater government control over critical infrastructure and also over  their information infrastructure potentially have a significant advantage in that  they are able to control and shape their response to cyber insecurity with greater  autonomy.
It  is  possible  that  a  market-led  approach  to  national  cyber  security  will prove to be less effective than a state-led approach.
It is also possible that we  need to rethink the breadth and depth of security that we can usefully attach to  expectations of national cyber security.
Acknowledging these uncomfortable facts  is essential to developing a more robust approach to state security in the informa- tion age.
62 CERT'S PODCASTS: SECURITY FOR BUSINESS LEADERS: SHOW NOTES  Public-Private Partnerships: Essential for National Cyber Security  Key Message: Government agencies and private industry must build effective partnerships to secure national critical infrastructures.
Executive Summary  “While governments have a responsibility to their citizens to mitigate and control national security risks, they usually do not have the authority to directly control privately owned critical infrastructure and assets.
In the United States, for instance, the majority of critical infrastructure – over eighty percent by some estimates – is owned by private firms.”  “Developing partnerships between government authorities and infrastructure owners and operators is a method to help ensure the stability and availability of critical information and communication technologies.
Partnership between government and industry helps the government disseminate vital information about security threats and vulnerabilities, coordinate effective incident management, and understand the resilience of critical infrastructure.
The same partnership can help industry become aware of information about threats and vulnerabilities to which it would not normally have access and improve industry’s ability to manage risk.” [1]  In this podcast, Sam Merrell and John Haller, members of CERT’s Resilience Enterprise Management team, and Philip Huff, Manager of Security and Compliance with the Arkansas Electric Cooperative Corporation, discuss the actions necessary to create public-private partnerships between government and industry to strengthen national cyber security efforts.
This podcast is the second in a series on best practices for national cyber security.
The first podcast discusses establishing national computer security incident response teams.
PART 1: COMMUNICATION, TRUST, AND INFORMATION SHARING  Definition of Public-Private Partnership  For most nations, the government (public sector) is responsible for protecting national critical infrastructures.
However, elements of these are often owned and operated by a private sector (industry) organization.
Such partnerships serve as a mechanism to share information and share and mitigate risk.
Governments have essential information, and critical infrastructure owners and operators have hands-on access to information systems.
Both roles are essential for managing national cyber security.
Strategic Goals for Partnerships  According to the CERT report Best Practices for National Cyber Security: Public Private Partnership [1], there are two top-level strategic goals:  Facilitate communication between public and private entities Support the national cyber security strategy  Practices for Facilitating Communication  By way of example, after September 11, 2001, the U.S. government encouraged greater communication about critical system vulnerabilities between the government and critical infrastructure providers.
The U. S. Freedom of Information Act was a barrier for private sector organizations.
The law was changed to expand the definition of national security so that information shared by providers would not be subject to the law and therefore would not be disclosed.
Another key practice is to clearly define communication methods, channels, and rules to determine, for example, who is going to store the information and how the information will be used.
This practice requires that information be appropriately classified and categorized so that methods, channels, and rules address the sensitivity of the information.
PART 2: PRIVATE SECTOR BENEFITS AND PAIN POINTS; PARTNERSHIP MODELS  Benefits for Private Sector Organizations  Benefits include  being involved in crafting solutions and mitigations for dealing with new threats that make sense and are effective being able to provide input, and be heard and responded to as a result, being able to better determine how to mitigate threats and vulnerabilities buying into the solution  Industry risk models are typically based on historical data and threat probabilities.
Having access to real-time government threat information is helpful.
Pain Points for Private Sector Organizations  If a private sector organization does not have a trust relationship with their government agency partners, it is difficult to obtain relevant threat information.
Receiving broad brush information or a threat description where there is no feasible solution destroys the dialogue.
Having people who play a role in both the government agency and the private sector organization can help bridge the gap.
There is a natural tension between sharing too much information and not sharing enough to be helpful and useful.
Models for Structuring a Public-Private Partnership  The report [1] describes 3 models as follows:  Hierarchy: An example is the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and its 18 critical infrastructure sectors.
Pro: Usually have good rules for sharing information Con: May exclude some parties and thus may miss capturing some information  Community: An example is the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC).
Different groups with shared interests come together to share information, with each other and with the government.
Pro: The group defines its own rules for exchanging information.
Con: May not be the best model for sharing sensitive information due to being more inclusive than exclusive  Third party facilitated: A separate legal entity sits between private industry and the government.
This allows each party to share information that they may not be willing to share directly with an objective intermediary.
Pro: Extra layer of information protection as well as offering a neutral venue; data can be shared and then anonymized.
Depending on funding, the third party can add value that government and industry may not be able to on their own.
PART 3: NERC – A SUCCESSFUL PRIVATE-PUBLIC PARTNERSHIP  Background  The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) has been in existence since the late 1960s, as an industry standard-setting organization.
It has recently received statutory responsibility to provide mandatory and enforceable standards across industry.
NERC’s mission is to work with government and industry to ensure reliable electric power throughout North America.
NERC membership is mandatory for those engaged in providing electric power (there are over 1,900 organizations).
NERC reports to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and also works closely with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
NERC Services  NERC operates the (Electric Sector) Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ES-ISAC), which is another venue that private sector organizations can use to share information.
NERC conducts compliance assessments and works collaboratively with industry on standards and threat mitigation.
By virtue of having people from both government agencies and private sector organizations, NERC is able to take government information, understand it, and translate it into strategies for industry participation.
Best Practices for National Cyber Security: Public Private Partnership (CMU/SEI- 2010-SR-010).
[to be published by 2010 calendar year end]  North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC)  U.S. Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)  U.S. Department of Homeland Security National Cyber Security and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC)  CERT website  Copyright 2010 Carnegie Mellon University