(((

(((

Guidelines
for Children on 
Child Online 
Protection 

(((

(((

www.itu.int/cop

This document may be updated from time to time.
Third-party sources are quoted as appropriate. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is not responsible for the content of  external 
sources including external websites referenced in this publication.
Neither ITU nor any person acting on its behalf  is responsible for the use that might be made of  the information contained in this publication.

Legal notice 

Mention of  and references to specific countries, companies, products, initiatives or guidelines do not in any way imply that they are endorsed or 
recommended by ITU, the authors, or any other organization that the authors are affiliated with, in preference to others of  a similar nature that 
are not mentioned.
Requests to reproduce extracts of  this publication may be submitted to: jur@itu.int
© International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Second Edition, 2016

Disclaimer 

These Guidelines have been prepared by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and a team of  contributing authors from leading institutions active 
in the information and communications technologies (ICT) sector and in child online safety issues. These Guidelines would not have been possible without the 
time, enthusiasm and dedication of  its contributing authors.

ITU is grateful to all of  the following authors, who have contributed their valuable time and insights: (listed in alphabetical order of organisation)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

John Carr (Children’s Charities’ Coalition on Internet Safety)

• 
•  Michael Moran (Interpol)
• 
Janice Richardson (Insafe)
•  Cristina Bueti (ITU) 
•  Dieter Carstensen, Cristiana de Paoli and Mari Laiho (Save the Children)
•  Maria José Cantarino de Frías (Telefonica)

The authors wish to thank Kristin Kvigne (Interpol) for her detailed review and comments. ITU wishes to acknowledge Salma Abbasi from eWWG for her 
valuable involvement in the Child Online Protection (COP) Initiative.
The second edition of  this publication has been updated by Neha Karkara. 
Additional information and materials relating to these Draft Guidelines can be found at: http://www.itu.int/cop/ and will be updated on a regular basis.
If  you have any comments, or if  you would like to provide any additional information, please contact cop@itu.int

Table of Contents

Foreword
Getting started  
1.  Background 
2.  Children and young people’s use of technology 
3.  What you need to know to stay safe online  
 
 
 
 
4.  Conclusions 
Sources for further reading & inspiration 
Appendix 1 
 
 

“SMART rules” for children and young people 
Guidelines for the age group 5-7 year old 
Guidelines for the age group 8-12 year old 
Guidelines for the age group 13 years and above 

Parent Contract 
Child’s Contract 

1
5
11
29
33 
47 
49 
55
73
75
76
76
77

Guidelines for Children and Young People

4

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young PeopleForeword

It is my pleasure to share with you the 2016 update of the Child Online 
Protection Guidelines. This version was updated at the request of  the 
Member States within the framework of  the Regional Initiative on COP, 
approved by the World Telecommunication Development Conference 
(WTDC-2014). I would like to thank the various stakeholders who 
contributed to the text.
In an era of  ‘always-on’ Internet, child online protection is a critical 
issue which, with the borderless nature of the Internet, requires a global, 
coordinated response. 
By using computers and mobile devices to access the Internet, children 
and young people can do a great deal to combat and guard against cyber 
threats themselves, and I hope this guide will help them do so. 

Mr Houlin Zhao 
Secretary-General of  the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)

Guidelines for Children and Young Peoplewww.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People1

What are these Guide-
lines about?
This manual contains Guidelines 
for children and young people in 
all parts of  the world on how to 
keep themselves and others safe 
online. However, a young internet 
user of  seven years of  age is very 
unlikely to have the same needs or 
interests as a 12 year old just start-
ing at High School or a 17 year 
old on the brink of  adulthood. At 
different points in the Guidelines, 
the advice or recommendations 
fits these different contexts. 

How should these Guide-
lines be used? 
These Guidelines have been 
prepared in the context of  the 
Child Online Protection (COP)1 
Initiative in order to establish 
the foundations for a safe and 
secure cyberworld not only for 
today’s children but also for future 
generations. These Guidelines are 
meant to act as a blueprint, which 
can be adapted and used in a way 
that is consistent with national or 
local customs and laws.  

While older children will be able 
to grasp the ideas in the manual 
directly, younger children will 
need support to understand the 
context fully. Parents, teach-
ers, caregivers and other adults 
supporting children to use these 
guidelines should remember that 
while broad guidelines can be 
1  www.itu.int/cop                                                                                                                                               

Getting started 

useful, it should never be forgot-
ten that, in the end, each child 
is different. Each child’s specific 
needs should be given individual 
consideration. Moreover there 
are many different local legal and 
cultural factors which could have 
an important bearing on how 
these Guidelines might be used or 
interpreted in any given country 
or region.

Moreover certain subjects con-
tained in this manual can be 
sensitive such as online sexual ex-
ploitation and abuse of  children. 
Working with younger children on 
this issue should be approached 
carefully. It is important that the 
explanations and the messages 
you give to children about such 
issues are appropriate to their 
age and development. Encourage 
children to ask questions and state 
their opinions.

Why are these Guidelines 
important?
The information society in which 
today’s children and young people 
are growing up, offers an instant 
digital world through the click 
of  a mouse. An unprecedented 
level of  services and information 
is accessible through a computer 
or a mobile device with Internet 
access. The barriers associated 
with the cost of these devices and 
access to the Internet are dimin-
ishing rapidly. All these technical 
developments provide children 
and young people with unparal-
leled opportunities to explore 
new frontiers and meet people 
from faraway places. Children and 
young people are truly becoming 
digital citizens in an online world 
that has no borders or frontiers.

 

Guidelines for Children and Young People2

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People3

More often than not, this is a 
positive and educational experi-
ence: one that assists

younger generations in better 
understanding both the 
differences and commonalities 
of  the people of  the world. 
However, children and young 
people also need to be aware of  
some of  the potentially negative 
aspects of  the technologies.

Harmful activities can include 
bullying and harassment, identity 
theft and online abuse (such 
as children seeing harmful and 
illegal content, or being exposed 
to grooming for sexual purposes, 
or the production, distribution 
and collection of  child abuse 
material).

These are all threats to children 
and young people’s well being 
and a challenge that must be 
addressed by all stakeholders, 
including children themselves. 
Whilst all providers of  online 
services should do whatever they 

can at a technical level to make 
the Internet as safe as it can be 
for children and young people, 
the first and best form of  defence 
in protecting YOU is making 
you aware of  what can happen 
online and make you understand 
that there is always a solution to a 
problem that you may encounter 
online. Empowering children and 
young people through education 
and awareness raising is therefore 
of  paramount importance.

Moreover there is now a substan-
tial body of  international com-
mitments, law and international 
instruments which underpin and 
in many cases mandate action to 
protect children both generally, 
and also specifically in relation to 
the Internet. Those commitments, 
laws and instruments form the 
basis of  these Guidelines. 

The United Nation’s Convention 
of  the Rights of  the Child 
(CRC)2 and specifically the 
outcomes of  The World Summit 

on the Information Society 
(WSIS) (2003-2005)3, WSIS+10 
High Level Event Outcome 
Documents (2014)4 and the 
outcomes of  the United Nations 
General Assembly Overall 
Review of the Implementation 
of  the WSIS Outcomes (2015)5 
recognize the needs of children 
and young people to be protected 
in cyberspace. The Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)6 
adopted by the United Nations in 
2015 further obligates countries 
to work towards ending all 
forms of  abuse, exploitation 
and violence affecting children 
and young people by 2030. This 
includes any kind of  abuse and 
exploitation faced by children and 
young people online.

Through these Guidelines, the 
COP Initiative calls upon all 
stakeholders, including children 
and young people, to promote 
the adoption of  policies and 
strategies that will protect children 
in cyberspace and provide safer 
access to all the extraordinary 
opportunities and resources that 
are available online. It is hoped 
that this will not only lead to 
the building of  a more inclusive 
information society, but also 
enable countries to meet their 
obligations towards protecting 
and realizing the rights of  
children as stated in the CRC, the 
WSIS Outcomes Document and 
now in the SDGs.

2  http://www.unicef.org/crc/
3  http://www.itu.int/wsis/outcome/booklet.pdf
4  http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/implementation/2014/forum/inc/doc/outcome/362828V2E.pdf
5  http://unpan3.un.org/wsis10/
6  http://www.wvi.org/united-nations-and-global-engagement/publication/child-friendly-version-proposed- 
 

post-2015-goals

Guidelines for Children and Young People4

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People5

Background 

Online technologies present many 
possibilities to communicate, 
learn new skills, be creative and 
contribute to establishing a better 
society for all, but often they 
also bring new risks e.g. they can 
expose children and young people 
to potential dangers like illegal 
content, viruses, harassment (e.g. 
in chat rooms), the misuse of 
personal data or grooming for 
sexual purposes. There is no silver 
bullet solution to protect children 
and young people online. This is a 
global issue that requires a global 
response from all segments of  
society, including children and 
young people themselves.

Recognising the grave dangers 
that may face children and 
young people in cyberspace, the 
international community has 
made a number of  agreements 
and laws that protect children 

and young people from any 
kind of  harm online. While 
these international instruments 
recognise that governments are 
foremost responsible to take 
action to keep children and 
young people safe in relation to 
the Internet, they also recognise 
the important role children and 
young people can play in keeping 
themselves and other children 
safe online. 

The CRC, approved by the United 
Nations in 1989, is the most 
important and significant legal 
tool in the defence and promotion 
of  children and young people’s 
rights. The CRC recognises the 
human rights of  all children in 
all parts of  the world, including 
children’s right to be protected 
from any kind of  violence and 
harm, including in cyberspace. It 
also recognises children’s right to 

Guidelines for Children and Young People1.6

participate in keeping themselves 
and others safe. The CRC is also 
the most universally accepted 
convention in history. This means 
most governments agree to fulfill 
the rights that are set out in the 
CRC.

Further, the WSIS which was 
held in two phases in Geneva 
(from 10 to 12 December 2003) 
and in Tunis (from 16 to 18 
November 2005) concluded 
with the approval of  the WSIS 
Outcome Documents which 
made a bold commitment “to 
build a people-centred, inclusive 
and development oriented 
information society, where 
everyone can create, access, 
utilize and share information and 
knowledge.” 

At WSIS, ITU was entrusted 
by leaders of  the international 
community with Action Line 
C5: “building confidence and 
security in the use of ICTs”. The 
WSIS outcomes also specifically 
recognized the needs of children 

and young people and their 
protection in cyberspace. The 
Tunis Commitment recognized 
“the role of  ICTs in the 
protection of  children and in 
enhancing the development of  
children” as well as the need to 
“strengthen action to protect 
children from abuse and defend 
their rights in the context of 
ICTs”.

The year 2015 marks the 10th 
anniversary of  WSIS. On this 
occasion the UN General 
Assembly is all set to evaluate 
the progress made by WSIS and 
define its next steps. To this 
end, the WSIS+10 High-Level 
Event (that took place in Geneva 
in 2014) was organized as an 
extended version of  the WSIS 
Forum. The High Level Event 
addressed the progress made 
in the implementation of  the 
WSIS outcomes (2003 and 2005) 
especially related to the Action 
Lines, and developed proposals 
on a new vision beyond 2015. 

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People7

inequality and injustice and tackle 
climate change by 2030.  These 
goals build upon the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs), 
which will expire at the end of  
2015. Target 16.2 of the SDGs 
says that abuse, exploitation, 
trafficking and all forms of  
violence and torture against 
children and young people must 
end by 2030. This includes any 
kind of  abuse and exploitation 
faced by children and young 
people online. The States are now 
further obligated to work towards 
making cyberspace safe for 
children and young people.  

The WSIS+10 High Level 
Event Outcome Documents7 
revised the text of the Action 
Line C5 while recognizing the 
importance of  the Child Online 
Protection (COP) Initiative and 
youth empowerment. It states, 
“Ensure special emphasis for 
protection and empowerment 
of  children online. In this 
regard, governments and other 
stakeholders should work together 
to help all enjoy the benefits 
of  ICTs in a safe and secure 
environment.” The document 
further highlights priority 
areas to be addressed in the 
implementation of  WSIS beyond 
2015. With regard to children’s 
online security it emphasises, 
“Promoting a culture of  online 
security and safety, empowering 
users, and encouraging national, 
regional and international 
cybersecurity strategies to protect 
users, including children”.

Further the Council of  Europe 
Convention on Protection 
of  Children against Sexual 
Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, 
adopted in 2007 (also known 
as the Lanzarote Convention) 
focuses on preventing, protecting 
and prosecuting the sexual 
exploitation and abuse of  
children. It strongly criminalises 
of  all kinds of  sexual offences 
against children including child 
pornography. 

The global community of  
children and young people further 
stated in the Outcome Document 
of  the World Congress III against 
Sexual Exploitation of  Children 
and Adolescents held in Brazil 
in 20088 the following: “We ask 
for strong cyber safety rules 
which are well propagated on 

both the websites and within the 
communities. To this end we call 
for the increased development of  
children’s, teachers’, parents’ and 
family manuals which address the 
threats of  the Internet in addition 
to providing supplemental 
information about Sexual 
Exploitation of  Children.”

The African Union has also 
adopted the Africa Cyber Security 
Convention in 2014, which 
highlights ways to address child 
pornography in the region. 

The latest international agreement 
that secures children’s rights is 
the commitment made by world 
leaders to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). 
The SDGs are a set of  17 goals 
and 169 targets that guide global 
efforts to end poverty, fight 

7  For more details see, WSIS+10 High Level Event Outcome Documents available at http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/implementation/2014/forum/inc/doc/   
 
8  http://www.ecpat.net/sites/default/files/ECPATWCIIIReport_FINAL.pdf

outcome/362828V2E.pdf  

Guidelines for Children and Young People8

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People9

Case Study: Children and Young People’s Voices9

The World Congress III against Sexual Exploitation of  Children and Adolescents took place in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 25 to 28 November 2008. 
There were 3,500 participants including 300 adolescents – 150 of which were from foreign countries.
It concluded with an outcome document called the “Rio de Janeiro Declaration to Prevent and Stop Sexual Exploitation of  Children and 
Adolescents”, which contains the “Adolescent Declaration to End Sexual Exploitation”. Here are some of  the key messages from children and young 
people to the world:

We the children of  the world 
commend the Government of  Brazil 
and the other governments and 
responsible agencies for giving us 
the children, the present and future 
of  the world, a voice at this World 
Congress III
…
7. We are at this moment calling 
for governmental actions to 
effectuate laws and policies that 
redound to the benefit, protection 
and well-being of  children both 
on the local and international level. 
However, it is simply not enough 
to allow governments to make 
empty promises to curb this attack 

on children. Consequently, we the 
children, ask that action committees 
be created to audit the action plans in 
each country.

8. We also call for the adoption of  an 
International Day where children will 
lead the effort in awareness raising 
campaigns, rallies and marches. To 
further enlarge the scope of this day, 
we request the organization of  an 
International Art, Essay and Speech 
competition which will culminate on 
this day.

9. We now turn our attention to the 
media particularly the Internet which 
poses one of  the greatest threats to 

millions of  children throughout the 
world.

10. We the children must make 
known our plight for governments to 
pursue strict and punitive legislation 
with regards to the Internet, 
especially child pornography- simply 
another form of  abuse.

11. We similarly ask for strong 
cyber safety rules which are well 
propagated on both the websites and 
within the communities. To this end 
we call for the increased development 
of  children’s, teachers, parent’s and 
family manuals which address the 

threats of  the internet in addition to 
providing supplemental information 
about sexual exploitation of  children.

12. Further, we provide a mandate 
for the media to gather documents, 
reports, folders, CDs, videos and 
other materials to increase knowledge 
on this issue. We the children of  
the world pledge to vehemently and 
passionately pursue these policies and 
to call our governments to action if  
we do not see positive steps being 
taken to end this phenomenon that 
continues to scourge the world today.

9  Source: http://www.iyac.net/iyac_charter.pdf  The full “Adolescent Declaration to End Sexual Exploitation” can be found at: http://www.unicef.org/brazil/pt/br_IIIWC_En.pdf  

Guidelines for Children and Young People10

“Children and young 
aware of the opportunities”

people online should be 

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People11

Children and young 
people’s use of 
technology

Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) are changing 
the way children interact with 
their peers, the way they access 
information, express their 
views, post and share creative 
content. Children and young 
people specifically like the 
highly interactive nature of  
many Internet related services. 
In general, for children, the 
Internet is something they feel 
secure about, something they like, 

and something interesting, fun, 
relaxing, useful, and friendly.
Access: A study in the United 
States10 finds that the age of  
accessing the Internet has reduced 
a lot. About 80% of  children 
under the age of  five years use 
the Internet weekly. Moreover as 
children get older, their use of  
the Internet also increases. In the 
United States about 42% and 36% 
of  8-11 year old boys and girls, 

10  http://content.usatoday.com/communities/technologylive/post/2011/03/study-80-percent-of-children- 
 

under-5-use-internet-weekly/1#.VkDrLOvNz8E (Accessed 9 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People2.12

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People13

respectively, use the Internet many 
times a day and around one-fifth 
do so daily.11 More than 90% of  
teens report going online daily — 
including about 25% who say they 
go online “almost constantly”.12 
Across the world in South Korea, 
which is considered the world’s 
most wired country, government 
data says about one in ten South 
Korean children between the ages 
of  10 and 19 are addicted to the 
Internet.13

Children under nine years old 
enjoy a variety of  online activities, 
including watching videos, playing 
games, searching for information, 

doing their homework and 
socialising within children’s virtual 
worlds. The range of  activities 
increases with age.14 Listening to 
music, watching video clips and 
social networking top the list of  
activities done on a daily basis by 
9-16 year olds as revealed in study 
of  European children and young 
people. Other social activities 
that rate fairly high include using 
Skype and WhatsApp. Other 
activities such as searching for 
information to satisfy a curiosity, 
schoolwork, playing games (alone 
or in multiplayer games) are part 
of  the daily media diets of around 
one in three children.15

The widely available fixed broad-
band Internet access in the 
developed countries is still the 
preferred way of  getting online, 
in comparison to developing 
countries where such infrastruc-
tures are less developed. In many 
countries Internet cafés and other 
communal resources are also 
important providers of  access for 
children and young people. They 
are likely to remain so for some 
time. 

In recent years however mobile 
Internet access has increased tre-
mendously. In the Asia Pacific re-
gion, the fastest growing region in 

relation to mobile subscriptions, 
China and India have become 
leaders in the technology with 
about 980 million mobile phone 
subscribers in India alone16. The 
world’s mobile connections now 
number seven billion17 – more 
than 230 million of  which include 
Mobile Broadband18. In Latin 
America, mobile broadband is 
now more widespread in the 
region than fixed broadband, due 
to the affordability of  mobile 
devices and the growing coverage 
of  mobile networks.19 Australian 
statistics show that in 2015 35% 
of  children aged 8 to 11 years 
own a mobile phone, which is 

(Accessed 2 November 2015)

11  http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Most-US-Children-Use-Internet-Least-Daily/1010789#sthash.bZFoyZxz.dpuf  (Accessed 25 November 2015)
12  Pew Research Center, Teens, Social Media & Technology Overview 2015, Available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/09/teens-social-media-technology-2015/ (Accessed 9 November 2015)
13  http://www.businessinsider.com/south-korea-online-gaming-addiction-rehab-centers-2015-3 (Accessed 10 November 2015)
14  Holloway,D., Green, L. and Livingstone, S. Zero to eight. Young children and their Internet use. 2013. LSE, London: EU Kids Online. Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/52630/1/Zero_to_eight.pdf   
 
15  Mascheroni, G. and Ólafsson, K. Net Children Go Mobile: risks and opportunities. Second Edition 2014. Milano: Educatt. Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/56986/1/__lse.ac.uk_storage_LIBRARY_ 
Secondary_libfile_shared_repository_Content_Net%20Children%20Go%20Mobile%20Project_Reports_Net%20children%20go%20mobile%20risks%20and%20opportunities%20%282nd%20ed.%29. 
 
 
pdf  (Accessed 3 November 2015)
16  Press Release, Telecom Regulatory Authority of  India, 2015, Available at: http://www.trai.gov.in/WriteReadData/WhatsNew/Documents/PR-No=47.pdf (Accessed 2 November 2015)
17  http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases/2015/17.aspx#.VjgW7OvNz8E (Accessed 2 November 2015)
18  https://mobiforge.com/research-analysis/global-mobile-statistics-2014-part-a-mobile-subscribers-handset-market-share-mobile-operators (Accessed 2 November 2015)
19  Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), The new digital revolution: from the consumer Internet to the industrial Internet, 2015. Available at http://repositorio.cepal.org/ 
 

bitstream/handle/11362/38767/S1500587_en.pdf?sequence=1 (Accessed 26 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People14

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People15

twice as many as in 2007.20 It is 
clear children and young people 
are now increasingly using mobile 
devices to go online, including 
smartphones and tablets. 
Digital devices: There are 
number of digital devices through 
which children and young people 
now go online such as desktop 
computers, laptop computers, 
mobile phones, smartphones, 
tablets, other handheld devices 
such as iPod Touch, e-book 
readers and games consoles. 

A 2014 study in the UK shows 
that more than a third of 12-15 
year olds access the Internet 
through a smartphone. Moreover 
the tablet is the one media device 
that has grown most in popularity 

amongst 5-7 year olds over the last 
year, with 54% using it in 2014 as 
compared to 39% in 2013. At the 
same time, access to a PC or lap-
top in the home for children aged 
5-15 years has been declining.21 
This has also resulted in high use 
of social media applications (such 
as Facebook, Twitter, Whatsapp) 
especially through mobile apps.  
Similarly in Brazil, in 2013 a little 
over half of the children (53%) 
use the mobile phone to access the 
Internet. In 2012, this population 
was 21%. Internet access through 
tablets went from 2%, in 2012, to 
16% in 2013.22

However children and young peo-
ple experience slightly increased 
risk of harm when accessing the 
Internet via a smartphone or 

tablet, as they are less likely to be 
monitored by parents or caregivers. 
Children with smartphones also 
access the Internet more often, 
engage in a greater range of activi-
ties, and have a higher number of  
online skills.23

The increased used of Internet 
through smartphones also pro-
vide several benefits. For example, 
a range of educational services 
could be provided via mobiles to 
children in remote villages and 
communities. Mobile phones could 
serve as an essential means for 
children to become connected to 
one another for educational and 
peer-learning activities. These are 
particularly important for com-
munities that are either nomadic or 
have been displaced due to natural 

disasters, war civil strife or other 
major disruptive events.
Information: The access to 
information is crucial for children 
and adolescents when doing their 
homework. A study on children’s 
Internet usage in the UK24 
indicates that 75% of children 
aged 8-11 years and 84% of  
adolescents aged 12-15 years use 
the Internet to help them with 
their homework. Similarly in Brazil, 
87% of children and young people 
aged 9-17 years use the Internet 
for schoolwork.25 The library has 
moved online and the ability to 
seek and find relevant and reliable 
information in any language is a 
great advantage which has been 
embraced by the young generation 
throughout the world.

(accessed 26 November 2015)

20  https://kids.ownfone.com.au/children-and-cell-phones-statistics#.VldJvITtkhY (Accessed 26 November 2015)
21  Ofcom Report on Internet safety measures, Strategies of parental protection for children online, 2014, Available at http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/internet/internet-safety-measures.pdf  
 
22  ICT Kids Online Brazil 2014, Available at http://cetic.br/media/docs/publicacoes/2/tic-kids-online-2013.pdf (accessed 10 November 2015)
23  Stald, G., Green, L., Barbovski, M., Haddon, L., Mascheroni, G., Ságvári, B., Scifo, B. and Tsaliki, L. Online on the mobile: Internet use on smartphones and associated risks among youth in Europe. EU Kids Online 2014.   
 
24  Ofcom Report on Internet safety measures, Strategies of parental protection for children online, 2014, Available at http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/internet/internet-safety-measures.pdf (accessed 25 November 2015)
25  ICT Kids Online Brazil 2014, Available at http://cetic.br/media/docs/publicacoes/2/tic-kids-online-2013.pdf (Accessed 25 November 2015)

Available at: http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/research/EUKidsOnline/EU%20Kids%20III/Reports/MobileReport.pdf  (accessed 13 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People16

One of  the most used resources 
online is Wikipedia26. Wikipedia 
is a multilingual, Web-based, 
free-content encyclopedia project, 
where you can read, edit and write 
articles on any subject or issue 
you find relevant. Fact finding 
exercises can easily lead you from 
one page on to the next and so 
on. The search for new informa-
tion is never boring and with the 
increased localisation of  con-
tent, the language barriers slowly 
diminish. 
Social networks: The birth of  
online social networks has been 
a remarkable success. The variety 
of  social networks caters to all 
ages, cultures and languages. 
Having a profile on a social 
network has become an important 

part of  many children and young 
people’s online lives. When 
home from school, the ability to 
continue your discussions with 
your friends online whilst doing 
your homework, sending SMS’s 
and listening to music (frequently 
at the same time!) is a picture 
many will recognize. Social 
networks can often represent 
a one-stop gateway to games, 
friends, news, music, and ways 
of  self-expression. In other 
words, you can be creative, funny, 
reflective and entertained by using 
ICT’s. 

Social networking tends to top 
the activities taken up by children 
on a daily basis, and children 
who also use a smartphone and 
a tablet to go online are more 

likely to engage in activities on a 
social networking site every day. 
Overall, about 70% of  children 
and young people have at least 
one profile on a social networking 
site in Europe27. On the same 
lines, about 80% of  Internet 
users between the ages of  9 and 
17 years have social networking 
profiles in Brazil, reveals the ICT 
Kids Online Brazil 2013 survey.28 
Among these studies, Facebook 
emerges as the most commonly 
used social networking site among 
children and young people. 

In the UK one in four children 
use Twitter the most to socially 
network in the online world. 
Sharing photos, videos and other 
content are other most popular 
online activities. Most children 

and young people in Europe also 
have a profile on a media-sharing 
platform such as YouTube, Insta-
gram or Flickr.29 

An example of  young people 
creatively using media sharing 
platforms could be that of  
a young band that creates a 
new song, posts the video on 
YouTube30, and informs their 
friends and fans about it. The 
fans can then see this song by 
streaming it online on their 
mobile phone, tablet or PC. If  
they like the song, they will spread 
the word by telling their friends, 
who will then tell their friends and 
so on. With simple techniques 
and little financial investment, this 
band can now gain a greater fan 
base and potentially be heard by 

shared_repository_Content_Net%20Children%20Go%20Mobile%20Project_Reports_Net%20children%20go%20mobile%20risks%20and%20opportunities%20%282nd%20ed.%29.pdf  (Accessed 3 November 2015)  

26  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page
27  Mascheroni, G. and Ólafsson, K. Net Children Go Mobile: risks and opportunities. Second Edition 2014. Milano: Educatt. Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/56986/1/__lse.ac.uk_storage_LIBRARY_Secondary_libfile_  
 
28  ICT Kids Online Brazil 2014, Available at http://cetic.br/media/docs/publicacoes/2/tic-kids-online-2013.pdf (Accessed 10 November 2015)
29  Mascheroni, G. and Ólafsson, K. Net Children Go Mobile: risks and opportunities. Second Edition 2014. Milano: Educatt. Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/56986/1/__lse.ac.uk_storage_LIBRARY_Secondary_libfile_  
 
30  https://www.youtube.com

shared_repository_Content_Net%20Children%20Go%20Mobile%20Project_Reports_Net%20children%20go%20mobile%20risks%20and%20opportunities%20%282nd%20ed.%29.pdf  (Accessed 3 November 2015)

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People17

a record company that wishes to 
sign them to their label. Stories 
now abound of  bands promoting 
their songs via services like 
YouTube and ending up with a 
record deal. 

This is not so different from 
the offline world, but the ability 
to reach a larger audience in a 
shorter time is one of the great 
advantages of  ICT’s. In essence, a 
service might take off  slowly but 
reach critical global mass in a very 
short time due to the ability of 
the children and young people to 
instantly share their experiences 
with friends. 

Virtual worlds for children and 
teenagers: In these worlds, chil-
dren can often create an avatar 

and, with it, explore an imaginary 
universe. They can play games, 
chat and decorate virtual rooms 
or other spaces. In 2012, there 
were over 150 virtual worlds 
either operating or in develop-
ment which are aimed at children 
and young people under 18 years 
of  age31, according to K Zero, a 
consulting firm. These sites have 
around 355 million registered us-
ers under the age of  10 and over 
800 million aged 10 to 15 years.32

Webkinz, Neopets and Club 
Penguin are some of  the vir-
tual worlds that are particularly 
popular with children aged eight 
and under, while children over 
ten years tend to prefer the virtual 
worlds of  Poptropica, Moshi 
Monsters and Moviestar Planet.33 

31  http://www.kzero.co.uk/blog/young-children’s-play-in-online-virtual-worlds/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)
32  Burke. A., Children’s Construction of  Identity in Virtual Play Worlds – A Classroom Perspective, 2013,  
  Memorial University, Available at: http://ejournals.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/langandlit/article/view 
 
33  http://www.kzero.co.uk/blog/category/universe-graph/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)

File/19779/15290 (Accessed 3 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People18

The positive benefits from 
social networks for  children 
with learning difficulties can 
be summarised as follows:22
Practicing social skills: you 
get a chance to meet all kinds 
of  people online. Because 
socializing via technology 
isn’t as immediate as face-to-
face interactions or telephone 
conversations, you have a little 
more time to think about a 
situation before you respond. 
This is an opportunity for you 
to experiment with greetings, 
responses, etc. 
Defined/guided social in-
teraction: While online com-

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People19

Virtual worlds such as Wizard 
101, Roblox and Minecraft are 
popular with children aged 12-14 
years. However among 14 – 15 
year olds, girls become more 
engaged than boys, showing 
the popularity of  fashion based 
virtual worlds such as Stardoll and 
GoSupermodel. The Stardoll has 
about 250 million global accounts.  
As evident there are virtual worlds 
catering to each specific age 
group and gender.34 

Virtual worlds, like Club 
Penguin, that target primary 
and elementary school children, 
allow users to create a profile and 
take on the identities of penguin 
avatars35 to play game and 
activities. All users will have to 
design their own avatar with easy 
to use tools. The ability to appear 
as an avatar allows for everyone, 

regardless of  their real world 
physical appearance, to enter a 
community where all are equal 
and prejudice does not exist. 

Taking on this new identity can 
allow for the user to express 
themselves differently, testing 
a new profile or attitude, being 
bold and upfront on issues that 
matter to them, or even just 
live ‘some- body’ else’s life for 
a while. Needless to say that 
there are rules that need to be 
followed, but the ability to test a 
different personality can be a fun 
experience.

34  http://www.kzero.co.uk/blog/category/kidstween-worlds/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)
35  Avatars in video games are essentially the player’s physical representation in the game world, 
 
36  Habbo’s Second Global Youth Survey 2008  

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avatar_(computing)

What’s your online profile?: An interesting study with Habbo 
Hotel’s (a virtual world targeting 13 years and older)36 users reveals the 
digital profiles of  teens online:

Achievers

Rebels

Traditionals

Creatives

Loners

Ambitious, strong minded and materialistic.  They 
value material success and whilst having lots of  
friends do not consider other people's feelings as 
much as other segments

Value gathering lots of  experiences in life and enjoy 
a fast-paced lifestyle.  Like Achievers they want to 
become “rich and famous”, but they are not willing 
to compromise on having fun in order to achieve this 
goal

Value having an ordinary life and see themselves as 
honest, polite and obedient.  They are keen to help 
others but are less ambitious and pleasure seeking 
compared to other segments

Share many of  the same positive traits as 
Traditionals, but with a focus on creativity.  They 
place value in getting a good education and being 
influential in life, but they are also active, social and 
have an interest in travelling

More introverted and less likely than other segments 
to identify with any specific personality traits.  They 
rarely see themselves as active or self-assured, but 
are more open minded in their attitudes compared to 
Traditionals or Achievers

Guidelines for Children and Young People20

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People21

Children and young people have 
online profiles and communicate 
with each other by posting 
comments or greetings on their 
friend’s profile pages. Having 
many friends linked to ones 
profile does appear to give a 
high status amongst their peers, 
although it is questionable 
whether having a high number 
of  online friends in itself  is an 
objective to strive for. Still, a 
typical teen Facebook user has 
an average of  300 friends while 
the typical teen Twitter user has 
79 followers found a study in the 
United States37. 

Many social networks facilitate 
the creation of  sub groups based 
on themes such as democracy, 
pets, games, school work music 

and so forth. These communities 
might not be available to you 
in your town, region, country, 
but here again; ICT’s folds the 
world and brings it to your 
screen and offers you the 
possibility of  experimenting 
with forms of  participation 
and freedom of  expression that 
are rarely guaranteed in their 
real, everyday lives in the adult 
world. The positive culture that 
reigns in online communities 
helps everyone to have a good 
experience and increases the 
willingness to engage with other 
people online and learn about 
new things. 

37  Pew Research Center, Teens, Social Media, and Privacy, 2013. Available at http://www.pewinternet.
org/2013/05/21/teens-social-media-and-privacy/(Accessed 9 November 2015)
38  http://www.greatschools.net/cgi-bin/showarticle/3120 (Accessed 26 November 2015)

Case Study: The Bright Side of  Social Networks for Children with 
Learning Difficulties

The  positive  benefits  from  social  networks  for  children  with  learning 
difficulties can be summarised as follows38:
Practicing social skills: you get a chance to meet all kinds of people on-
line. Because socializing via technology isn’t as immediate as face-to-face 
interactions or telephone conversations, you have a little more time to think 
about a situation before you respond. This is an opportunity for you to ex-
periment with greetings, responses, etc.
Defined/guided social interaction: While online communication tech-
nologies increasingly allow for freeform interaction, social interaction can 
be narrowed (for purposes of scope and safety). Some examples of focused 
interaction online include buddy/friend lists, moderated themed chat rooms 
or message boards and, for younger children, the opportunity for parents 
to help a child by typing or reading along some of the time. This can help 
children build skills and confidence that will increase their independence as 
they mature.
Identity experimentation: A child can create an online identity that is dif-
ferent from what he or she normally presents. For example, a kid who really 
likes comics can be the “king of all superhero knowledge” online without 
being teased about it at school. Such a child can also find a peer group online 
that appreciates this aspect of him or her.”
Frequent use of  existing and emerging/changing technologies:
Technology is evolving faster than ever before. As you learn to adapt to new 
technologies (or new applications of existing technologies), you will be bet-
ter equipped to adapt to future technology. This will help you quickly assess 
the risks of communicating through these new and adapt your behaviour to 
maintain control over your own safety.

Guidelines for Children and Young People22

“Be smart, responsible and 
safe online – just like in the 

“Be smart, responsible and 
real world”

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People23

Games: Classic board games 
have also moved online and are 
now played alongside what is 
called “massively-multiplayer 
online role-playing games” 
(MMORPGs), such as the World 
of  Warcraft. As with social 
networks, online games can con-
nect you with other players from 
around the world. More than 70% 
of  gamers play with a friend and 
millions of  people worldwide par-
ticipate in massive virtual worlds.39 
A recent research in UK shows 
majority of  children in each age 
group who play games online play 
on their own/against the com-
puter or games player, accounting 
for over four in five 5-7 year olds, 
close to seven in ten 8-11 year 
olds and seven in ten 12-15 year 
olds40. The research also shows 

an increase in the numbers of  
younger children playing games 
online. A 2014 Cox Internet Safe-
ty Survey reveals nearly three in 
four online gamers interact with 
other gamers online through web 
chat, voice chat and web cam.41 
It is indeed a social activity that 
captures youth universally and can 
be played now on the smallest of 
handheld devices42. 

The term “online gamer” may 
conjure up images of  a lone teen-
ager playing “Ever- Quest” in his 
parents’ basement, but that’s not 
how it is in South Korea. Group 
interaction is as strong a cultural 
tradition in that country as study-
ing and shopping. Young people 
go to the PC bangs to blow off  
steam and to hang out. Commu-

nity within games is really popu-
lar, as well as the ability to form 
groups, or guilds. These social as-
pects are a big reason why people 
keep playing games in South 
Korea.”43 However given the 
excessive hours spent by children 
and young people playing online 
games, South Korea passed the 
Shutdown law (also known as the 
Game Addiction Law) in 2011. 
The Law forbids children under 
the age of  16 in South Korea to 
play online video games from 
midnight to 6:00 A.M. Given the 
debate over this law, the Culture 
and Gender Equality Ministry 
announced in September 2014 
that children aged 16 and below 
may be able to play online games 
in midnight with the approval of  
their guardians.44

The risks in online gaming also 
arise largely due to the minimal 
restrictions involved and the fact 
that they are not face-to-face. Be-
cause of  this, children and young 
people cannot be sure who they 
are playing against and chatting to 
or what their motives are. Chil-
dren could also be playing online 
games with an inappropriate 
age rating. A survey by Get Safe 
Online45 reveals about 25% of  
children and young people have 
disclosed personal information 
while online gaming. About 35% 
of  children and young people 
have spoken to someone they 
don’t know while online gaming, 
while more than 15% of  the chil-
dren have been bullied or verbally 
abused while online gaming.

39  http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2013/11/video-games.aspx (Accessed 10 November 2015)
40  Ofcom Report on Internet safety measures, Strategies of parental protection for children online, 2014, Available at http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/internet/internet-safety-measures.pdf (accessed 25 November 2015)
41  Cox 2014 Teen Internet Safety Survey, Available at http://www.cox.com/wcm/en/aboutus/datasheet/takecharge/tween-internet-safety-survey.pdf  (Accessed on 26 November 2015)
42  The Integration Centre. Online Gaming and Youth Cultural Perceptions. Available at http://www.integrationcentre.ie/getattachment/3728d764-143f-4ece-bf9a-a0134ceda102/Online-Gaming-and-Youth-Cultural-Perceptions. 
 
43  Adapted http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17175353/ (accessed 10 November 2015)
44  http://treeofsaviorgame.com/general/313/understand-game-addiction-law-in-south-korea-in-5-minutes/ (accessed 10 November 2015)
45  https://www.getsafeonline.org/safeguarding-children/gaming/ (Accessed 10 November 2015)

aspx (Accessed 3 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People24

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People25

Digital Citizenship: 
The introduction of  new 
technologies always carries the 
need to understand how to use 
it appropriately. We, including 
children and young people, can 
demand that the producers and 
providers build in as many safety 
features as possible, enabling 
us to make informed choices 
on matters, like for instance, 
revealing private information. A 
2015 global survey on privacy on 
the Internet reveals that two out 
of  three websites and apps collect 
and process personal data of  
children, and half  of  the sites and 
apps share personal information 
about children with other 
organizations. In more than 70% 
per cent of  these sites and apps, 

it was not easy to delete personal 
information from an account.46

Given this scenario, it is up to 
children and young people to 
carry the main responsibility 
of  acting appropriately and 
respectfully online. Increasingly 
the term of  digital citizenship is 
being used. Digital citizenship 
isn’t just about recognising and 
dealing with online hazards. It’s 
about building safe spaces and 
communities, understanding how 
to manage personal information, 
and about being Internet savvy 
- using your online presence to 
grow and shape your world in a 
safe, creative way, and inspiring 
others to do the same47.

Safer Internet celebrations: 
The positive and safer use of  
the Internet is celebrated around 
the world every year. This might 
involve children, the local school, 
industry and relevant players who 
all collaborate in creating greater 
awareness of  the opportunities to 
get a positive online experience. 
To get the most updated 
information on these events it is 
suggested you do a search online 
for terms like “internet safety 
celebration” + “country name”.

46  https://www.getsafeonline.org/safeguarding-children/gaming/ (Accessed 10 November 2015)
47  http://www.insidemarketing.it/privacy-e-minori-il-50-di-siti-web-e-app-condivide-i-dati-di-bambini-con-terze-parti_8103/ (Accessed 25 November 2015) http://www.digizen.org/

Guidelines for Children and Young People26

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People27

Here is a list of issues you should consider when discussing “Digital Citizenship.”48

Digital Etiquette: 
electronic standards of  
conduct or procedure.
•  It is not enough to create 
rules and policy, we must 
learn to become responsible 
digital citizens in this new 
society.

Digital Communication: 
electronic exchange of  
information.
•  Anyone should be afforded 

the opportunity to access 
information anywhere and 
anytime.

Digital Literacy: process of  
teaching and learning about 
technology and the use of 
technology.
•  As new technologies emerge, 
we need to learn how to use 
that technology quickly and 
appropriately. We need to be 
digital literate.

Digital Access: full 
electronic participation in 
society.
•  Digital exclusion of  any kind 
does not enhance the growth 
of  human beings in an elec-
tronic society. One gender 
should not have preferential 
treatment over another. Elec-
tronic access should not be 
determined by race, physical 
or mental challenges. The 
issue of  people in cities or 
towns with limited connec-
tivity needs to be addressed 
as well. To become produc-
tive citizens, we need to be 
committed to equal digital 
access.

Digital Commerce: electronic 
buying and selling of  goods.
•  Children and young people 
need to learn about how to 
be effective consumers in a 
safe digital economy.

48  http://www.digitalcitizenship.net/Nine_Elements.html (Accessed 26 November 2015)

Digital Law: electronic respon-
sibility for actions and deeds.
•  Digital law deals with the 

ethics of  technology. There 
are certain rules of  society 
that fall under illegal acts. 
These laws apply to anyone 
who works or plays online.
Digital Rights and Responsi-
bilities: those freedoms extend-
ed to everyone in a digital world.
•  Basic digital rights must be 
addressed, discussed, and 
understood in the digital 
world. With these rights also 
come responsibilities. Users, 
including children and young 
people, must help define 
how the technology is to 
be used in an appropriate 
manner. In a digital society 
these two areas must work 
together for everyone to be 
productive.

Digital Security (self-protec-
tion): electronic precautions to 
guarantee safety.
•  In any society, there are 

individuals who steal, deface 
property, or disrupt other-
people’s lives. The same is 
true for the digital com- mu-
nity. It is not enough to trust 
your peers in the community 
for your own safety. In our 
own homes, we put locks on 
our doors and fire alarms 
in our homes to provide 
some level of  protection. 
The same must be true in 
the digital world to provide 
protection and digital secu-
rity. We need to have virus 
protection, backups of  data, 
and surge control of  our 
equipment. As responsible 
citizens, we must protect our 
information from outside 
forces that might cause dis-
ruption or harm.

Guidelines for Children and Young People28
“All children and young people around the world 
have the right to a safe experience online ”

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People29

What you need to know 
to stay safe online

INTERNET SAFETY 
GUIDELINES:
Internet safety messages need to 
be timely, age specific, culturally 
sensitive and match the values and 
laws of  the society in which the 
child or young person lives.

The COP Initiative has 
identified three principal age 
groupings of  young Internet 
users. These groupings broadly 
correspond with the key stages 
of  development on a child’s 
journey to adulthood. Hence 
the guidelines can be seen as a 
ladder which takes you through 
progressive phases. However, we 
cannot emphasise too strongly 
that every child is different who 

requires and deserves individual 
attention. One size does not fit all. 
Nothing should ever be assumed 
or taken for granted.
The first age group 5-7 year 
old:
This group experience their 
first contacts with technology. 
Their usage should be closely 
supervised at all times by a parent 
or adult. Filtering software or 
other technical measures may also 
have a particularly useful role to 
play in supporting the use of the 
Internet by a child of  this age. It 
would be wise to consider limiting 
such a young child’s potential 
access e.g. by constructing a list 
of  safe websites, which are age 

Guidelines for Children and Young People3.30

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People31

The COP guidelines recognize 
the difficulty in creating messages 
that will cover the needs of all 
ages within the defined groups. 
Local laws and customs are also 
profoundly important in matters 
of  this kind. There is not a one-
size-fits-all. The COP Initiative 
would be very happy to assist 
with adapting and localizing the 
content of  this and any other 
COP Guidelines. If  you wish to 
pursue this, you are invited to 
make contact via cop@itu.int.

appropriate such as a walled 
garden. The aim is to provide 
this age group with the basics 
in Internet safety, etiquette 
and understanding. This age 
group will probably not be able 
to decode more sophisticated 
messages. Parents or adults with 
responsibility for children should 
consult the COP guidelines for 
parents, guardians and educators 
to see how they might best assist 
the youngest age group to stay 
safe online.
The second age group: 8-12 
year old:
This age span is a challenging 
transition for the child. Typically 
he or she is becoming a young 
person with a greater capacity to 
form questions. Their curiosity 
will start to push them to seek 
out and challenge boundaries, 
looking for their own answers. It 
is an age group where awareness 
of  what is available online exists. 
The impulse to seek and find out 
what’s there is great. Throughout 

childhood a child is expected 
to test the barriers and evolve 
through this kind of  learning. 
Filtering software or other 
technical measures may have a 
particularly useful role to play in 
supporting the use of the Internet 
by a young person of  this age.

An important aspect of this age 
group is the sometimes uncritical 
approach to content and contact, 
which can put the age group in a 
particularly vulnerable situation 
for predators and commercial 
entities wishing to engage with 
them.
The last age group: 13 year old 
and above:
This group is the one covering 
the longest span, is the group 
consisting of  young people 
who are, namely, teenagers. This 
group is growing up rapidly, 
transitioning from being young 
people to becoming young adults. 
They are both developing and 
exploring their own identities, 

their own tastes. They will very 
often be able to use technology 
with a high level of  proficiency, 
without any adult supervision or 
interaction. Filtering software will 
start to become less useful and 
less relevant but it certainly could 
continue to play an important 
supporting role, particularly for 
some young people who may 
have temporary or longer-term 
vulnerabilities.
Linked to their own hormonal 
development and a growing sense 
of  physical maturity, teenagers 
can go through phases when they 
feel a very strong need to find 
their own way, to escape close 
parental or adult supervision and 
seek out their peers. A natural 
curiosity about sexual matters 
can lead some people in this age 
group into potentially worrying 
situations and this makes it all the 
more important for them to un-
derstand how to stay safe online.

Guidelines for Children and Young People32

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People33

“SMART rules” 
for children and young people
S = Set your limits 
M = Meeting online friends offline 
A = Accepting invitations/friendships 
R = React 
T = Tell someone about your concerns
Using the Internet is fun. Enjoy it most by keeping 
yourself safe
1. You can do a lot of great things on the Internet. You can play games, 
you can chat with your friends, meet new friends and find a lot of 
useful information. You have the right to enjoy and explore all that the 
digital world has to offer!

2. But you also have to be aware that you can find some unpleasant 
things on the Internet, such as images and stories that may confuse 
or even frighten you. Your friends and trusted adults are not the 
only people within this digital world. Unfortunately the Internet is 
also used by people who are not so nice or who might even want to 
harm, harass or bully you or other people. While using the Internet 
you need to be aware of certain basic rules to be able to safeguard 
yourself and others.

3. You have the right to use the Internet safely and to set your own 
limits. Be smart, responsible and safe online, as well as in real life!

Guidelines for Children and Young People34

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People35

S = SET YOUR LIMITS
1. Take care of your privacy. Whether using a social networking site or 
any other online service take care of your privacy and that of your 
family and friends. You might have the feeling of being anonymous 
online but collecting information from various sources can reveal too 
much private information about yourself or others you are close to, 
including your family.

2. If you join a social networking site use the privacy settings to protect 
your online profile so that only your friends can see it. Wherever 
possible instead of your real name you should use a nickname that 
your real friends will be able to recognize. Other interactive services, 
for example instant messaging, will often also provide privacy tools. Use 
them

3. Think twice before you publish or share anything online. Are you 
prepared to share it with everyone online; your close friends, as well 
as strangers? Once you post information, photographs or any other 
material on the Internet, you may never be able to remove it or 
prevent other people from using it. You can never know for sure 
where it might end up.

4. Be critical what appears to be a fact may really not be true at all. 
Unfortunately, if it appears too good to be true, it probably is. Always 
double check the information from other reliable sources.

5. You have rights and you, as well as other people, should respect them. 
You should never accept harassment or bullying by other people. The 
laws and expectations of decent and acceptable behaviour are valid 
online as well as in real life.

Guidelines for Children and Young People36

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People37

M = MEETING ONLINE FRIENDS OFFLINE
1. Sometimes online contacts develop into friendships.

2. Think twice before meeting an online friend in real life. If you still 
would like to meet an online friend offline, you should always take 
someone reliable with you. You should ask your parent or another 
trusted adult to join you to avoid any trouble in case the meeting 
turns out to be a disappointment.

3. Bear in mind that your online friend might turn out to be a 
different kind of person than you thought he or she would be.

Guidelines for Children and Young People38

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People39

A = ACCEPTING INVITATIONS / FRIENDSHIPS
1. Most of the people you communicate with online are probably already 
your friends in real life. You can also be connected to the friends of 
your friends. Very often that can be fun but at the same time if 
you do not actually know someone yourself, are you really prepared 
to count them as a “friend” and share with them exactly the same 
information that you share with your oldest and best friends?
2. Through online connections you can connect with people previously 
unknown to you. You may get requests by strangers who want to be 
included in your contact list and see your profile, but it is not wise to 
accept them. There’s nothing wrong with declining invitations you are not 
sure about. Getting more and more contacts is after all not the point of 
social networking.

Guidelines for Children and Young People40

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People41

R = REACT
1.  Protect yourself from upsetting or distressing content. Do not 
knowingly access or share links to such sites. If you see something 
that bothers you, talk about this with your parents or someone 
you trust.

2.  Ignore bad behaviour and leave unpleasant conversations or sites 
with inappropriate content. As in real life there are people who for 
some reason, may behave aggressively, insultingly or provocatively 
towards others, or who want to share harmful content. Usually it is 
better just to ignore them and then block them.

3.  Block anyone approaching you using rude, intruding or threatening 
emails or comments. Even if the message may be upsetting and 
makes you feel uncomfortable you should save it so you can 
show it to an adult for advice if needed. You are not the one to be 
ashamed of the content of the messages.

4.  Always be alert if someone, especially a stranger, wants to talk to 
you about sex. Remember that you can never be sure of the true 
identity or the intentions of that person. Approaching a child or a 
young person in a sexual way is always a serious cause for concern 
and you should tell a trusted adult, so you or the trusted adult can 
report it.

5.  If you have been lured or tricked by someone into engaging in sexual 
activities or transmitting sexual images of yourself, you should 
always tell a trusted adult in order to receive advice and help. No 
adult has a right to request things of that particular nature from a 
child or a young person - the responsibility always lies with the adult!

Guidelines for Children and Young People42

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People43

T = TELL SOMEONE ABOUT YOUR CONCERNS
1.  If you have any concerns or problems while online, you need to 
tell someone you can trust. Your parents or some other adult 
can help and give you good advice on what to do. There are no 
problems that are too big to be solved! You might also want to call 
a child helpline  available in your country.

2.  You can report harmful or inappropriate content or activities on 

the websites to the abuse e-mail of the host of the site.

3.  You can report illegal content to an Internet Hotline or to the 

police.

4.  You can report illegal or possibly illegal activities to the local police.
5.  In addition to taking good care of yourself, you should also take 
care of your computer or mobile device. Like the SMART rules, 
there are some easy tips to remember in order to keep your 
computer and mobile device safe.

49   E.g. CHI available at: www.childhelplineinternational.org

Guidelines for Children and Young People44

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People45

Learn to use your 
machine safely:
1.  Make sure you have installed 
and learned how to use a fire-
wall and anti-virus software. 
Remember to keep them up 
to date!

2.  Learn about your computer’s 

operating system (like 
Windows, Linux, etc.) and 
especially about how to patch 
it and keep it up to date.
3.  If  parental controls are 

installed then talk with your 
parents and agree on the level 
that matches your age and 
needs. Don’t try to crack them.

4.  If  you receive a file you are 

unsure of  or don’t know who 
has sent it, do NOT open it. 
This is the way Trojans and 
viruses infect your machine.

5.  Get a feeling for your machine 

and how it works so that you 
can act if  you spot something 
unusual.

6.  Learn to check who you are 
connected to – learn to use 
tools like “Netstat” Finally, a 
great way to make sure that 
your parents agree with your 
online life is to set up a written 
agreement with them. The 
purpose is to reassure them 
that you are aware of  the risks 
associated with being online, 
knowing how to behave and 
what to do, as well involving 
your parents making them 
understand what you actually 
do when you are online. 
The agreement needs to be 
based on a mutual agreement 
between you and your parents. 
There is an example of  such 
a contract at the end of these 
guidelines (Appendix 1). You 
will be able to find different 
versions of  a Family Internet 
Safety Contract online.

Your online rights
•  You have the right to make 
use of  technologies to devel-
op your personality and help 
increase your capabilities;

•  You have the right to protect 

your identity;

•  You have the right to 
participate, have fun 
and access information 
appropriate to your age and 
personality;

•  You have the right to 

express yourself  freely, and 
be treated with respect while 
always respecting others;
•  You have the right to be 

critical and discuss anything 
you read or come across 
when online;

•  You have the right to say 

NO if  someone makes you 
feel uncomfortable with his/ 
her requests when online.

Guidelines for Children and Young People46

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People47

consult the COP guidelines for 
parents, guardians and educators 
to see how they might best assist 
the youngest age group to stay 
safe online. In addition, several 
useful and interesting links to 
online resources for this age 
group have been listed in the 
section ‘Sources for Further 
Reading and Inspiration’.

Guidelines for the age 
group 5-7 year old
Many young people in this age 
group will not be able to read 
or understand Guidelines of  
this kind. Their usage should 
be closely supervised at all 
times by a parent or adult as 
well. Filtering software or other 
technical measures may also have 
a particularly useful role to play in 
supporting the use of the Internet 
by a child of  this age. It would be 
wise to consider limiting such a 
young child’s potential access to 
the Internet e.g. by constructing 
a list of  safe websites which are 
age appropriate. The aim is to 
provide this age group with the 
basics in Internet safety, etiquette 
and understanding. This age 
group will probably not be able 
to decode more sophisticated 
messages. Parent or adults with 
responsibility for children should 

Guidelines for Children and Young People48

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People49

Guidelines for the age 
group 8-12 year old
There are lots of  different things 
you can do online. While most 
of  the time it’s all great fun, 
sometimes things don’t go as well 
as you hoped and you may not 
immediately know why or what to 
do about it. This section has some 
really helpful tips to help you be 
safe online.

Chatting to friends using IM, 
in chat rooms and on social 
networking sites can be great ways 
to keep up to date. Meeting new 
friends online is also fun. You 
can meet people online who like 
the same movies or sports as you. 
But while there are lots of good 
points about keeping in touch 
with online friends, there are also 
some risks with meeting people 
online—especially if you don’t 
know them in real life.

To help stay safe while you chat, 
remember some simple tips:

1.  Be careful who you trust 

online. A person can pretend 
to be someone they are not.

2.  Choose your friends. While it’s 
good to have a lot of  friends, 
having too many, makes it 
harder to keep an eye on who 
sees the stuff you post online. 
Don’t accept friend requests 
if  you really don’t know the 
person and you’re not sure 
about them.

3.  Keep your personal details 

private. Use a nickname 
instead of  your real name if  
you are in a site or game where 
there may be lots of  people 
you don’t know. Ask your 
parents before giving anyone 
on the Internet your name, 
address, phone number or any 
other personal details.

4.  Set your profile to private. 

Ask your parents to help you 
do this if  you’re not sure. It’s 
really important.

5.  Always keep your password 

secret. Don’t even share it with 
your friends.

6.  If  you want to arrange to 
meet someone you’ve met 
online, check with a parent 
first and ask them to go with 
you. Always meet in a brightly 
lit public place where lots of 
other people will be around, 
preferably during the day.

7.  If  someone writes something 
rude, scary or something you 
don’t like, tell your parents or 
another adult you trust.

Netiquette
By netiquette we mean how you 
should or should not behave with 
other people online. Sometimes 
it’s easy to forget that the other 
person you are chatting to on IM, 
playing a game with, or posting to 
their profile is a real person. It’s 
easier to say and do things online 
that you might not do in ‘real 
life’. This may hurt that person’s 
feelings or make them feel unsafe 

or embarrassed. It’s important 
to be kind and polite to others 
online— stop and think about 
how your behaviour will affect 
them.
Tips
•  Treat other people the way 
you would like to be treated. 
Avoid using bad language 
and don’t say things to 
someone to make them feel 
bad.

•  Learn about the ‘netiquette’ 
of  being online. What’s con-
sidered okay to do and say 
and what isn’t? For example, 
if  you type a message to 
someone in UPPER CASE 
they may think you are 
shouting at them.

•  If  someone says something 

rude or something that 
makes you feel uncomfort-
able, don’t respond. Leave 
the chat room or forum 
straight away. 

Guidelines for Children and Young People50

•  Tell your parents or another 
adult you trust if you read up-
setting language, or see nasty 
pictures or something scary. 

Playing online games
Playing games online and using 
consoles or games on a computer 
can be great fun, but you need to 
be careful about how much you 
play and whom you play with. It 
is important that if  you chat with 
other gamers you protect your 
privacy and don’t share personal 
or private information. If  you are 
unsure whether a game is suitable, 
ask your parents or a trusted adult 
to check its classification and 
reviews for you. 

Tips
•  If  another player is behaving 
badly or making you uncom-
fortable, block them from 
your players list. You may 
also be able to report them 
to the game site operator. 

•  Limit your game play time so 
you can still do other things 
like homework, jobs around 
the house and hanging out 
with your friends. 

ing unsafe and alone. No-one has 
the right to bully another person. 
At its most serious, bullying is 
illegal and can be investigated by 
the police. 

•  Keep personal details 

private. 

•  Remember to make time 

offline for your friends, your 
favourite sports and other 
activities. 

Bullying
The same rules apply online as 
in the ‘real world’ about how to 
treat other people. Unfortunately, 
people don’t always treat each 
other well online, and you, or a 
friend, may find that you are the 
target of  bullying. You might be 
teased or have rumours spread 
about you online, receive nasty 
messages or even threats. It can 
happen in school, or out of  it, any 
hour of  the day, from people you 
know, and sometimes people you 
don’t know. It can leave you feel-

Tips
•  Ignore it. Don’t respond to 
the bully. If  they don’t get a 
response they may get bored 
and go away.

•  Block the person. This will 
stop you seeing messages 
or texts from a particular 
person.

•  Tell someone. Tell your 
mum or dad, or another 
adult you trust. Keep the 
evidence. This can be useful 
in tracking the bully down. 
Save texts, emails, online 
conversations or voice- mails 
as proof. 

•  Report it to:

○  your school—they should 

have policies in place 
about bullying. 

○  your ISP and/or phone 
provider or the website 
administrator—there are 
actions they can take to 
help.

○  the police—if  there is a 
threat to your safety the 
police will help.

If a friend is being bullied 
online
It can be hard to know if  your 
friends are being bullied. They 
might keep it to themselves. If  
they are being bullied, you might 
notice that they may not chat 
with you online as much, or they 
suddenly receive lots of  SMS 
messages or are unhappy after 
they have been on the computer 
or checked their phone messages. 
They may stop hanging around 
with friends or have lost interest 
in school or social activities. 

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People51

Help stop bullying 
1.  Stand up and speak out! If  you 

see or know about bullying 
happening to a friend, 
support them and report it. 
You’d want them to do the 
same for you. 

2.  Don’t forward messages or 
pictures that may hurt or be 
upsetting to someone. Even 
though you may not have 
started it, you will be seen to 
be part of  the bullying cycle. 
3.  Remember to treat others as 
you would like to be treated 
when communicating online. 

Guidelines for Children and Young People52

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People53

4.  Check with your parents that 

your search engine is set to 
block material that is meant 
for adults. 

5.  Ask your parents to install 

internet filter software to block 
bad sites. 

6.  Ask your parents to help you 
find safe and fun sites to use 
and bookmark for later.

Your digital footprint
It’s great to share things online 
with your friends. Part of  the 
fun of  sharing videos, images 
and other content, is that lots of 
people can view and respond. 
Remember that others whom you 
don’t know may also view what 
you share with your friends. They 
may also be able to look at it for 
years to come. Everything you 
post adds up to your digital foot-
print and, once it’s online, it could 
be there forever. So think before 
you post. 

Tips
1.  Keep your personal details 
private. Use an appropriate 
nickname instead of  your real 
name. Ask your parents before 
giving anyone on the Internet 
your name, address, phone 
number or any other personal 
details. 

2.  Don’t share your username or 

password with anyone. 

3.  Think before you hit send or 
post. Once posted, it can be 
content difficult to remove 
content. 

4.  Don’t post anything you don’t 

want others to know or find 
out about you - or that you 
wouldn’t say to them face to 
face. 

5.  Remember that private images 
and videos you send to friends 
or pose of  a social networking 
sire may be passed on to other 
and uploaded to public areas.  
6.  Be respectful of other people’s 
content that you post or share. 
For example, a photo that your 
friend took is their property, 
not yours. You should post it 
online only if  you have their 
permission and make a note 
about where you got it from. 

Offensive or illegal 
content 
When you are surfing the web 
you may come across websites, 
photos, text or other material that 
makes you feel uncomfortable or 
upset. There are some easy ways 
to handle these situations.

Tips
1.  Tell your parents or another 

trusted adult if you come 
across material that upsets you. 
2.  Know how to ‘escape’ from a 
website if an Internet search 
takes you to an unpleasant or 
nasty website. Hit control-alt- 
delete if the site will not allow 
you to exit.

3.  If  a website looks suspicious 

or has a warning page for 
people under 18 years, leave 
immediately. Some sites are 
not meant for kids.

Guidelines for Children and Young People54

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People55

Guidelines for the age 
group 13 years and above
Huge number of  young people in 
this age group use social network 
sites, online games and Instant 
Messenger applications. Going 
online is not just something they 
do occasionally or for fun. For 
many it is an integral part of  their 
daily lives. It’s how they stay in 
touch with and communicate with 
their friends, how they organize 
large parts of  their social lives and 
school work. Here you will find 
information on how to be safe 
using these online platforms as 
well as insight into what you can 
do to help create a safe and posi-
tive online space for you and your 
friends. 

Harmful and illegal 
content
Curiosity, interests, and a desire 
to learn new things and explore 
new facets of knowledge: the 
Internet is a great tool to satisfy 
such needs. But the Internet is an 
open world in which everyone is 
free to circulate news or almost 
anything else. It contains an 
infinite amount of  information, 
so vast in scope that it is easy to 
get lost or run into untruths and 
material not appropriate to your 
needs or age. We are referring to 
sites that, for example, promote 
racial hatred or incite violence, 
sites that could lead you to 
come across pornographic or 
child abuse material and sites 
that can lead you to self-harm. 
This can occur in a purely 
accidental way, as in the case of 
searches on completely different 
subjects, through e-mailing, P2P 
programmes, forums, chat rooms 
and, more generally, through the 

many channels involved in social 
networking. 

Therefore
1.  Before starting a search you 
should have a clear idea of  
what you are looking for; 
2.  In order to narrow things 

down you can use advanced 
search functions or directories, 
that is, the thematic catego-
ries that most search engines 
provide (i.e., for sports, health, 
cinema, etc.); 

3.  Put your critical sense to work 
and try to determine whether 
the site is trustworthy: When 
you access the site do other 
pages begin to automatically 
open? Are you able to find 
out who owns the site? Is it 
easy to contact the owner? 
Can you tell who wrote the 
page or particular article you 
are viewing? (You can always 
do another search to find out 
more about the author and/

Guidelines for Children and Young People56

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People57

or owner). Make sure you have 
written the website address 
correctly; there are some sites 
that use a name similar to 
another to take advantage of  
possible incorrect typing. Is 
the site’s text spelt correctly or 
are there grammatical errors? 
Are there dates included that 
can indicate whether the site 
has been updated? Are there 
any legal notes (regarding, for 
example, privacy)?

4.  If, while surfing online, you 
come across sites containing 
violent, self-harm, racist, 
illegal or child abuse materials 
don’t forget that these sites 
can be reported to the police 
or a hotline. Try to find out 
to whom you can send these 
reports in your country; your 
parents or another adult you 
trust can also help you in filing 
a report. You should also 
talk to someone about what 

happened and any feelings 
you may still have about the 
occurrence/experience; 

5.  Contents (images, videos, 
etc.) that are found on the 
web relating to sex can often 
be of  a pornographic nature 
and convey sexual material in 
a typically adult manner with 
sentiments that are not appro-
priate to your age group.

What is grooming? 
The Internet and mobile phones 
can potentially be used by abusive 
adults to make contact with boys 
and girls. This happens particu-
larly through SMS and MMS mes-
saging, chat rooms, Instant Mes-
saging programmes, newsgroups, 
forums, online games, and, more 
generally, through all the social 
networking spaces, where it is 
possible to obtain information on 
users’ ages, sex and more, through 
the profiles they’ve compiled.

Sexual predators use the Internet 
to contact children and young 
people for sexual purposes, often 
using a technique known as 
“grooming”. This involves gaining 
the child’s or young person’s 
confidence by appealing to his or 
her interests. These predators are 
highly manipulative people. They 
often introduce sexual topics, 
photos and explicit language to 
raise sexual awareness and get 
their intended victims to drop 
their guard. Gifts, money and 
even tickets for transportation are 
sometimes used to persuade and 
lure the child to a place where 
the predator can sexually exploit 
him or her. These encounters 
may even be photographed or 
video- taped, or if  a meeting does 
not take place in the real world 
the predator might persuade the 
child to make sexual images of  
themselves or their friends or take 
part in sexual activity using a web 
cam to broadcast it.

Many children and young people 
who get drawn into these kinds 
of  predatory relationships will 
lack a certain level of  emotional 
maturity or have low self-esteem 
that can make them susceptible 
to this kind of  manipulation 
and intimidation. They may 
also be hesitant to tell adults 
about their encounters for fear 
of  embarrassment or of  losing 
access to the Internet. In some 
cases they are threatened by 
predators and told to keep the 
relationship or what happened a 
secret.
For this reason: 

•  It is essential that you be 

aware of  this risk, and that 
not everyone online is who 
he/she claims to be. Online 
seducers can often pretend 
to be your age in order to 
create an atmosphere of  fa-
miliarity and trust that could 
lead to an offline meeting 
and possible abuse;

Guidelines for Children and Young People58

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People59

•  Protecting your personal 

data is important; in the real 
world, you would never give 
out such details and you’d 
never tell people you don’t 
know about your private 
matters. Even if  a nice 
virtual friendship has been 
formed, that might seem 
like it could lead to some-
thing more, it is important 
to remember that you don’t 
always know who is really at 
the other end of  the com-
puter;

•  In order to enter a chat 
room, forum, or more 
generally, a social network, 
you often have to compile 
a personal profile, inserting 
information that can be 
detailed to varying degrees. 
In such cases, it is essential 

to be cautious about 
inserting identifiable or 
traceable data (name and 
surname, address, the name 
of  your school, mobile 
phone numbers, e-mail 
address, etc.). Such details 
can become accessible to 
anyone, and it is therefore 
advisable to create an 
identity for yourself, using 
nicknames or aliases and 
fictional images or avatars, 
and not provide any detailed 
personal information;

•  When you are curious about 
your sexuality or your more 
intimate feelings, remember 
that the Internet can some-
times be a source of really 
good advice and information 
but very often it is better to 
try to find a way to discuss 

these things with people 
who you already know and 
trust in real life.

•  If  attempts at allurement or 
awkward situations should 
occur, it is important to 
find someone to speak to, 
an adult or friend; Internet 
service providers will also 
often allow users to report 
incidents by clicking on 
“report” or “notify”, in 
order to report the abuse. 
Alternatively, you can turn 
directly to the police.

It is also advisable to save 
e-mails and chat room text, 
SMS or MMS messages 
(using “messages inbox”, 
for example), as they can be 
provided as evidence to the 
police.

Sexting
Sexting is the sending and receiving 
of text, photo or video messages 
of children and young people that 
are inappropriate and sexually 
explicit. These images are mostly 
self generated and shared through 
mobile phone MMS, Skype and so-
cial networking sites where images 
can be posted and shared (such as 
Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Flickr, 
YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat 
etc.)50 According to a recent survey, 
about 20 percent of teen boys and 
girls have sent such messages.51 
Young people may also call it 
cybersex or sending a nudie, picture 
or selfie.52 Most young people do 
not see ‘sexting’ as a problem. 
Many consider it as flirting and are 
reluctant to talk to adults about it 
because they are afraid of being 
judged or having their phones and 
gadgets taken away.

50  So you got naked online. Available at https://esafety.gov.au/~/media/cesc/documents/sygno-english-brochure-pdf-so-you-got-naked-online.pdf  
(Accessed 3 November 2015)
51  https://www.aap.org/en-us/about-the-aap/aap-press-room/news-features-and-safety-tips/pages/Talking-to-Kids-and-Teens-About-Social-Media-and-Sexting.
aspx#sthash.TcXDRfUF.dpuf (Accessed 3 November 2015)
52  http://www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/keeping-children-safe/sexting/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People60

Sexting may be considered harm-
less but there are several risks. 
Taking, sharing or receiving an 
image, even voluntarily, can have 
a long-lasting negative impact. 
Young people can become vul-
nerable to blackmail, bullying, 
unwanted attention and emotional 
distress. Moreover sexting is ille-
gal. By sending an explicit image, 
a young person is producing and 
distributing child abuse images 
and risks being prosecuted, even 
if  the picture is taken and shared 
with their permission. It’s easy to 
send a photo or message but the 
sender has no control about how 
it’s passed on.

When images are stored or shared 
online they become public. They 
can be deleted on social media 
or may only last a few seconds 
on apps like Snapchat, but im-
ages can still be saved or copied 

by others. These images may 
never be completely removed and 
could be found in the future, for 
example when applying for jobs 
or university.53 A study finds that 
about 90% of  self-generated sex-
ually explicit photos and videos 
by young people are taken from 
its original upload source and put 
somewhere else.54

It is important to be aware that 
sexting is not a harmless activity 
and can have serious consequenc-
es. Here are some ways to take 
action and stay in control55:

•  If  someone is pressuriz-

ing you to send a sexually 
explicit picture of you, ask 
them to stop. Just don’t reply 
at all and hopefully they’ll 
get the hint. But if they’re 
still bothering you or mak-
ing you feel upset it’s okay 
to block them - even if  it’s 

just for a bit. It is wrong for 
anyone to be pressuring you 
in this way.

•  If  an adult has been making 

you feel uncomfortable by 
asking you to send them im-
ages, you can report them. If  
an adult does this it is called 
online grooming. (You can 
read more about grooming 
in the section above.) If  you 
are under 18, they are break-
ing the law.

•  If  you have sent a picture or 
video you regret to a friend, 
someone you met online or 
your girlfriend/boyfriend 
ask them to delete it imme-
diately. If  you have received 
a sexually explicit photo, you 
should delete it immediately 
too. Remember if  you send 
it on, you are distribut-
ing pornography - and you 

could get into trouble with 
the police.

•  If  your picture is posted 

online then un-tag yourself  
and report it to the website 
where it is posted so it can 
be removed.

It’s important to know that mak-
ing a report doesn’t mean the 
content will definitely be re-
moved. Most websites have a set 
of  rules - ‘Terms of  Use’ - which 
they expect people using their site 
to obey. Websites will only take 
content down if  they break these 
rules. If  you want to have some-
thing taken down from a site you 
should check

to see if it breaks one of  their 
rules. Facebook calls their rules 
‘Community Standards’, You-
Tube’s rules are called ‘Commu-
nity Guidelines’ and other sites 

53  http://www.nspcc.org.uk/preventing-abuse/keeping-children-safe/sexting/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)
54  https://www.iwf.org.uk/resources/iwfresearch (Accessed 10 November 2015)
55  Adapted from https://esafety.gov.au/esafety-information/esafety-issues/sexting (Accessed 10 November 2015)

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People61

like Tumblr, Twitter and Instagram 
have their own sets of rules and 
ways to report. Before using any 
website you should read them to 
learn what is, and what isn’t, ac-
ceptable on the site. You should 
also learn how to report content to 
the site.56

If you have been affected by sex-
ting it is important to tell some-
one. Talk your parent, teacher or 
another adult that you trust so they 
might be able to get you the sup-
port that you really need. Sharing 
with a trusted friend may help too.

Bullying
Through services such as e-mail, 
forums, chat rooms, blogs, Instant 
Messaging programmes, SMS and 
MMS, and video cameras, it is 

possible to keep in touch with old 
friends or make new ones in real 
time and in all parts of the world 
and to exchange ideas, play games, 
carry out research, etc. Although 
most of these services and the 
ways they are used are positive, in 
some cases these same tools can 
be used to offend, deride, defame 
and annoy Internet users; and 
furthermore, violent or offensive 
off-line behaviour becomes magni-
fied when filmed with mobile 
phones and exchanged or posted 
on the Net.

What is bullying? Bullying is the 
act of intentionally causing harm 
to another person through verbal 
harassment, physical assault or 
other more subtle methods of  
coercion such as manipulation. In 

everyday language bullying often 
describes a form of harassment 
perpetrated by an abuser who pos-
sesses more physical and/or social 
power and dominance than the 
victim. The victim of bullying is 
sometimes referred to as a target. 
The harassment can be verbal, 
physical and/or emotional. (www.
wikipedia.org)

Very often bullying takes place in 
schools or local neighbourhoods. 
Unfortunately, there are increasing 
numbers of bullies and real forms 
of bullying online, ranging from 
offensive websites to harassing text 
messages, and sending unwanted 
photos via mobile phones and 
so on. This particular form of  
bullying – which can possibly of-
fend and hurt someone without 

necessarily involving any physical 
contact – can have just as painful 
consequences as that of tradi-
tional forms of bullying. In United 
States, about 24% of teens report-
ed being bullied online in 201457. 
In Europe, 15% of children and 
young people reported online bul-
lying in 201558. Other studies in

Europe show that cyberbullying is 
on the rise. Among 13-14 year-
olds, the rate of cyberbullying has 
increased from 8% to 15% in four 
years (2010-2014)59.

For this reason it is important that 
you know that this phenomenon 
exists and that you are aware of  
the different forms it can take and 
what can be done to avoid becom-
ing a victim:

56  http://www.thinkuknow.co.uk/14_plus/help/Contact-social-sites/ (Accessed 3 November 2015)
57  Cox 2014 Teen Internet Safety Survey, Available at http://www.cox.com/wcm/en/aboutus/datasheet/takecharge/tween-internet-safety-survey.pdf (Accessed on 26 November 2015)
58  INSAFE and INHOPE helpline data, available at http://helplines.betterinternetforkids.eu/# (Accessed 26 November 2015)
59  European Schoolnet, Bullying in Schools, A summary of  research and anti-bullying initiatives, 2015 Available at http://files.eun.org/enable/assets/downloads/Review%20of%20bullying%20and%20cyber%20bullying%20
summary%20report.pdf  (Accessed 16 November 2015)

Guidelines for Children and Young People62

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People63

•  Do not circulate your per-
sonal data thoughtlessly, as 
this could make you easily 
identifiable and more prone 
to acts of  bullying and 
intimidation by others your 
own age;

•  Once information is posted 
online it is out of  your con-
trol and available to anyone 
and open to any sort of  use. 
You need to be completely 
clear on this concept; what 
may seem like an innocent 
joke could wind up having 
very irritating and hurtful 
consequences for others;
•  It is important to refrain 
from reacting to provoca-
tions received via SMS, 
MMS, and instant messages, 
in offensive or defamatory 
e-mails, in chat rooms or 
during online encounters 
with other users. Instead 
you need to employ certain 
strategies that can exclude 
or limit the actions of  those 

attempting to provoke you 
such as:
○  Many games allow for 

the exclusion of  undesir-
able (or unwanted users);

○  When chat rooms are 

monitored, it is possible 
to save the offending text 
from the chat and report 
it to the monitor;

○  Abuses can be reported 

to service providers or, in 
the case of abuse via mo-
bile phones, the report 
can be sent to the mobile 
phone company;

○  In the more serious cases, 

such as cases involv-
ing physical threats, it is 
advis- able that the police 
also be informed;

○  It is possible to trace 

the e-mail account from 
which the offensive 
message was sent, but 
practically impossible to 
prove who actually used 

it to send the message. 
The online bully could 
also hack into someone 
else’s account and use 
it for his/her offensive 
behaviour and therefore 
letting the blame fall on 
the unfortunate person 
whose e-mail account 
was wrongfully used;

○  Most e-mail programmes 

offer filters to block un-
wanted incoming e-mails.

•  Many instant messaging 

programmes offer the 
possibility of  creating a list 
of  names that users can 
choose to block. In this way, 
you can prevent unwanted 
people from making contact 
with you. 

An Instant Messaging (IM) system 
lets you know when one of  your 
known and approved contacts 
is online and, at that point, you 
can begin a chat session with 
the person you feel like talking 

with; there are quite a number 
of  different IM systems, such 
as Windows Live Messenger, 
ICQ, AOL Messenger, Yahoo 
Messenger! Bullies know which 
are the most popular among 
youngsters and make use of  them 
for their own purposes such as 
flaming, or provoking an online 
fight. Conversations or fights that 
break out online can, at times, 
have after-effects that drag on at 
school or other places offline.
In all cases remember that it 
is important to tell someone 
about what is happening if  you 
ever feel at all uncomfortable or 
threatened.
Tell your parents, a teacher 
or someone within the school 
staff  you feel you can trust. 
Even telling your friends could 
be helpful.
You can also report to the service 
provider or mobile operator, 
even to the police if it is serious. 
Remember to save the evidence 

Guidelines for Children and Young People64

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People65

of the bullying, as this will be 
really important when you tell 
someone.

Bullying is not acceptable either 
in an online or an offline environ-
ment. In many countries there 
are national or local organizations 
that you can turn to for help. In 
some countries, such as Canada, 
‘cyber-bullying’ is considered 
an actual criminal act. In most 
countries it is a criminal offence to 
threaten someone or to harass or 
stalk them, whether in real life or 
online.

An interesting fact: the term bully 
originally had a very different 
meaning from the one it has today 
- in fact, 500 years ago it meant 
“friend” or “family member” – 
how things have changed!

Defend your privacy: Nowadays, 
setting up a blog or a personal 
website, is relatively simple. In 
order to join a chat room, forum 
or more generally, a social net-
work, you must first put together a 

personal profile that includes more 
or less detailed types of informa-
tion. Different sites have different 
rules. Before you enter any infor-
mation about yourself into a site’s 
database or membership records, 
check how the information might 
be used, whether or not some or 
all of it will be published, and if so 
where. If you feel uncomfortable 
with the amount of information 
being asked of you, if you do not 
really know or trust the site, don’t 
provide it. Look for another or 
similar service which asks for less 
information or promises to treat 
your information more carefully. 

Wherever possible it is advisable 
to create an identity (or alias) by 
using an invented nickname and 
not add anything else. Above all it 
is important for you to have a clear 
understanding of what may be and 
what is best not to share with oth-
ers. What goes online can quickly 
go beyond your control and be at 
anyone’s disposal for any possible 
use:

•  Whenever you need to 

divulge your personal data 
make sure that whoever 
is requesting information 
about you is authentic and 
serious and also remem-
ber that before giving data 
regarding your friends you 
need to first inform them 
and have their permission 
because they may not be 
happy about having their 
e-mail addresses or other 
information about them 
passed on to others;

•  You may not be obliged to 
provide all of  the informa-
tion requested of you and 
you should insert only the 
types of  data that are strictly 
required. In any event, it is 
always best to find out as 
much as possible about the 
person, service or company 
you are dealing with before 
providing your data. In par-
ticular check to see if  the site 
asking for the data proposes 

to send you any advertising 
material, or if  they propose 
to pass on your details to 
any other companies. If  you 
don’t want them to do either 
or both of  those things, tick 
the relevant boxes. If  they 
don’t offer you an option 
you really should think about 
not using the service at all. 
Send personal photos and 
videos only to those you 
actually know, your image 
constitutes personal data and 
you need to make sure it is 
not circulated thoughtlessly. 
The same goes for images 
of  others. Keep in mind that 
it is practically impossible to 
determine where an online 
image can end up; before 
filming or photographing 
someone you should always 
ask for their permission.

•  When you need to register 
for a particular service, try 
to employ a few simple 
devices: for example, use 

Guidelines for Children and Young People66

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People67

a password that would be 
hard to figure out so that 
no one else can guess it 
and get into your account; 
use a complex e-mail 
address, possibly with both 
numbers and letters (e.g. 
mrx- 3wec97@... . com) so 
it be- comes more difficult 
to guess by spammers 
or unknown people who 
might want to send you 
unwanted mail; make sure 
your anti-spam service (for 
incoming e-mails) and anti-
virus controls (for e-mail 
attachments) are activated 
and continuously updated; 
use two e-mail addresses, 
one which is strictly personal 
and for correspondence with 
only your real life contacts 
(friends, relatives, and such), 
and another to be inserted in 
all those online registration 
forms that ask for personal 
data (user profiles, 
competition announcements, 
online games, etc.) that 

you already know could be 
accessed by strangers.

•  Do not open email 

attachments from sources 
you do not know or 
programmes you do not 
know the possible effects of, 
they could be a Key Logger 
(capable of  recording all 
the keys being punched 
on the keyboard, enabling 
them to find out passwords, 
numeric codes, credit card 
numbers etc.), E- Grabber 
(capable of  gaining access 
to all the e-mail addresses 
stored on the victim’s PC), 
or Info Grabber (capable of  
extracting information such 
as the various Registration 
Keys of  a PC’s most 
important programmes). 
Without your knowledge 
these programmes can 
send over the Internet 
all the information these 
programmes pick up to 
unknown persons.

•  Only engage in activities that 

you feel you are absolutely 
sure about. If  you “smell 
something fishy”, something 
that’s not quite right, that 
doesn’t totally convince 
you, or you think is being 
unjustly charged for, then 
your best move is to leave 
it alone. You have the right 
to criticise and question 
what you come across while 
online. Remember things are 
not always as they appear.

Respect copyright
What’s great about the Web is the 
infinite possibilities of finding and 
accessing all kinds of materials 
through search engines and they 
can be downloaded either free 
of  charge or paid for through 
your PC or mobile phone, and 
then used offline. Not everything 
found online can be used as you 
might wish; a lot of  content is 
protected by copyright law or 
entitlement rights.

•  Peer to Peer (P2P) software 

enables one to share 
and exchange one’s files 
directly with other Internet 
users, without any extra 
connection costs. Music, 
films, videos, and games are 
among the materials that 
are most sought after and 
downloaded by youngsters, 
but they are often covered 
by copyright provisions 
and protected by law. 
Unauthorized downloading 
and distribution of  
copyright-protected content
is a crime in most countries 
and punishable by law. It 
is also possible for your 
involvement in illegal 
downloading of  copy- 
righted material to be traced. 
This has led, for example, 
to a child’s parents being 
sent an enormous bill 
to cover the cost of the 
material downloaded and 
if  the family refuse to pay 

• 

Guidelines for Children and Young People68

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People69

the bill other forms of  legal 
action can be taken. Some 
countries are considering 
banning people from using 
the Internet if  they are 
caught persistently using 
it to obtain unauthorised 
access to copyrighted 
material. In addition, when 
using other people’s work, 
like articles or dissertations, 
remember to quote the 
sources appropriately. If  
you fail to do so it will be 
classified as plagiarism and 
that can cause you a great 
deal of  trouble. 

Remember
•  You are free to use, modify 

and distribute freeware 
programmes that are not 
copyright-protected; 

•  Some software are, on the 
other hand, shareware, and 
therefore free for a specific 
trial period; 

•  Your privacy and your PC 

could be harmed by viruses 
or other “malware”. It is 
therefore always best to 
install and continuously 
update protection systems 
such as anti-virus, anti-dialer 
software and a firewall. 
Always make sure to read 
the guide relating to the 
programme you are using to 
avoid making the errors that 
are listed below; 

•  Copyright protected material 

is generally indicated by 
standard wording, such as 
“all rights reserved” or other 
similar phrasings; in cases 
where this is not evident, it 
is nonetheless best not to 
take any risks; 

•  The Peer to Peer (P2P) pro-
grammes you use to share 
and download files also carry 
certain risks. One must have 
a very thorough understand-
ing of  them to be able to use 
them without running any 
security risks:

○  You may not always 
end up downloading 
what you intended to 
download: different 
types of  content may 
be concealed behind the 
title of  a song or video. 
In the worst cases, for 
example, it might con-
tain child abuse images. 
Examine your particular 
programme guide to find 
out how you can detect 
fake files and only go to 
sources you know are 
trustworthy: ask your 
friends to tell you which 
sources to use and which 
to avoid; 

○  Before opening a down-
loaded file make sure to 
scan it for viruses; anoth-
er quite frequent risk is 
in fact that a downloaded 
file might contain viruses 
and spyware that can put 
PCs, personal data and 
privacy at risk; 

○  Do not share your entire 

hard disk: check your 
configurations to ensure 
that you have shared only 
those folders you wanted 
to share and remember 
that sharing files pro-
tected by copyright is a 
crime.

Online commerce
You can purchase products online 
or by using a mobile phone. 
Purchases can be made by credit 
card or, in the case of mobile 
phones, by debiting the credit on 
the mobile phone subscription. 
There are also online spaces 
devoted to exchanges and 
purchases of  all sorts of  products, 
at very competitive prices.

One of  the fundamental 
difference between online and 
traditional commerce lies with 
the difficulty in identifying who is 
at the other end of  the exchange 
and the risk of  fraud that may lie 
just around the corner. One of  

Guidelines for Children and Young People70

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People71

the most widespread risks is that 
of “phishing”. This happens when 
people respond to fake emails, 
spam, which usually appear to 
come from a reputable source e.g. 
a bank or credit card company. 
They will ask you to enter a lot 
of personal information e.g. bank 
account details, passwords, date of  
birth and so on, which they will 
then misuse.

An additional complication with 
online commerce concerns the 
sale of products or services that 
are age restricted in some way. 
For example, in many countries 
it is illegal for vendors to sell or 
provide alcohol or tobacco to legal 
minors. Gambling is also generally 
limited to people over a certain 
age. Yet in the online environment 
it can be very hard for the vendor 
to determine the age of the person 
proposing to make the purchase or 
acquire the service. All that many 
companies do is ask the person to 
check a box to confirm they meet 
the minimum age requirement.

Some companies in a number of  
countries are beginning to deploy 
age verification systems linked to 
their purchasing procedures, but 
this is still a very new and limited 
technology, however it is a grow-
ing, practice. Buying age restricted 
products online, and telling lies 
about your age in order to do so 
means you could be committing 
a criminal offence and so could 
the vendor. You could forfeit the 
goods and you could end up with a 
criminal record, so don’t do it.

There are, in any case, a series of  
tactics that can help you reduce the 
risks and enable you to make use 
of the convenient opportunities 
offered by online commerce:

•  Take great care in choosing 

the sites that you want to 
make purchases from and 
ensure their credibility. 
Gather as much information 
as you can about the site 
in question, such as name, 
address, telephone number 
and head office of the 

company, description of the 
contract’s general conditions 
and, in particular, how to 
withdraw from the purchase; 
also find out about the 
protection and management 
of personal data and payment 
security; and compare prices, 
looking for the same item on 
other sites;

•  Prepaid credit cards, or ones 
that can be topped up, come 
with spending limits and 
can help avoid unpleasant 
surprises.

•  Before you buy anything 

online, make sure the 
site uses a secure system 
for transactions so as to 
prevent, for example, 
“sniffing”, which is a means 
of capturing data during 
transmission. Even though 
many sites incorporate 
systems that counter the 
interception of data in 
transit, your details could 
still be stolen if someone 

hacks into the server of the 
company where your credit 
card details have been stored. 
Clearly, by choosing other 
modes of payment you 
can avoid the possibility of  
someone stealing your credit 
card number.

•  If you receive an unsolicited 

e-mail offering you an 
incredible deal, it is highly 
likely that it is fraudulent;

•  If something looks too good 
to be true, it most probably 
is, and it would be best to 
forget about it.

•  In the case of purchases 

made by mobile phones for 
which a credit card is not re-
quired, verify what the costs 
of the services actually are, 
the service’s conditions of  
agreement and how one can 
back out.

Guidelines for Children and Young People72

Guidelines for Children and Young People

www.itu.int/cop73

Conclusions

By keeping these basic rules in mind, you will be able to steer clear 
of  the majority of  the pitfalls you can encounter online. Should you 
encounter unpleasant or disturbing experiences, make sure you talk to a 
trusted source. Remember, you have the right to be protected as well as 
the responsibility to act appropriately, offline as well as online.

Guidelines for Children and Young People4.74

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People75

Sources for Further Reading & Inspiration
United Nation’s Convention of  
the Rights of  the Child 
http://www.unicef.org/crc/

The Internet Big Picture - World 
Internet Users and Population 
Stats http://www.internetworld-
stats.com/stats.htm

The Children and Young Person’s 
Global Online Charter http://
www.iyac.net/children/index.htm

A number of  Childnet’s resources 
for young people 
http://www.childnet-int.org/
young-people/

Internet safety information 
(access to sites in different 
languages) 
http://www.saferinternet.org/
ww/en/pub/insafe/index.htm 
http://www.getnetwise.org/

WSIS Outcomes 
http://www.itu.int/wsis

WSIS+10 High Level Event 
Outcome Documents 
http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/
implementation/2014/forum/
inc/doc/outcome/362828V2E.
pdf

ITU’s activities on cybersecurity 
http://www.itu.int/cybersecurity

Child Online Protection (COP) 
Initiative 
http://www.itu.int/cop

Child-friendly version of  ‘A World 
Fit for Children’ 
http://www.unicef.org/ceecis/
child_friendly_ssoc_outcome.pdf

Opinion polls: What young 
people think 
http://www.unicef.org/polls

Connect Safely is for parents, 
teens, educators, advocates 
- everyone engaged in and 
interested in the impact of the 
social Web 
http://www.connectsafely.org/

Imagine Your Future – a 
prediction of  how the future will 
be http://www.elon.edu/e-web/
predictions/kidzone/yourfuture.
xhtml#kids%27%20 predictions

Children and Adolescents 
Statement at World Congress III 
Against Sexual Exploitation 
http://www.unicef.org/brazil/pt/
br_IIIWC_En.pdf

Guidelines for Children and Young People76

Appendix 1

Parent Contract
I know that the Internet can be a 
wonderful place for my kids to visit. 
I also know that I must do my part 
to help keep them safe on their visits. 
Under- standing that my kids can help 
me, I agree to follow these rules:
1.  I will get to know the services 

and websites my child uses.

2.  I will set reasonable rules and 
guidelines for computer use by 
my children and I will discuss 
these rules and post them near 
the computer as a reminder.

3.  I will not overreact if  my child 

tells me about something 
“bad” he or she finds or does 
on the Internet.

4.  I will try to get to know my 
child’s “online friends” and 
Buddy List contacts just as I 
try to get to know his or her 
other friends.

5.  I will try to provide close sup- 

port and supervision of  my 
younger children’s use of  the 
Internet, for example by trying 
to keep their computer in a 
family area.

6.  I will report suspicious and 

illegal activity and sites to the 
proper authorities.

7.  I will make or find a list 

of  recommended sites for 
children.

8.  I will frequently check to see 
where my kids have visited on 
the Internet.

9.  I will seek options for filtering 

and blocking inappropriate 
Internet material from my 
children.

10. I will talk to my kids about 

their online explorations and 
take online adventures with 
them as often as I can.

I agree to the above.

Parent signature(s)

Date 

I understand that my parents have 
agreed to live by these rules and I 
agree to help my parents explore 
the Internet with me.

Child signature

Date 

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young People77

Child’s Contract
I know that the Internet can be a won-
derful place to visit. I also know that it is 
important for me to follow rules that will 
keep me safe on my visits. I agree to the 
following rules:
1.  Wherever possible I will choose 
a safe and sensible screen name 
for myself that will not broad-
cast any personal information 
about my family or me.

2.  I will keep all of my passwords 

private. 

3.  I will discuss with my parents 

all of the different programmes 
and applications I use on my 
computer and on the Internet, 
and talk to them about the sites 
I visit. Before I download or 
load a new programme or join 
a new site I will check with my 
parents first to make sure they 
approve. 

4.  When considering signing up 
to a new online service I will 
avoid those which demand too 
much personal information 
and try to opt for those which 
ask for less.

5.  I will always take steps to find 
out what personal information 
about me will be published 
by the service by default in 
my profile and will always opt 
for the maximum degree of  
privacy.

6.  I will not share my personal 
information, or that of  my 
parents or any other family 
member, in any way, shape or 
form, online or with someone 
I meet online. This includes, 
but is not limited to name, 
address, telephone number, 
age or school name. 

7.  I will treat others the way I 

want to be treated. 

8.  I will use good manners when 

I’m online, including good 
language and respect. I will not 
pick fights or use threatening 
or mean words. 

9.  I will make my own personal 

safety my priority, since I know 
there are some people who 
might be online and pretend to 
be someone they’re not.
10. I will be honest with my 

parents about people I meet 
online and will tell them, 
without always being asked, 
about these people. I won’t 
answer any e-mails or instant 
messages from anyone my 
parents have not approved. 

11. If  I see or read things that are 

bad, icky or mean, I will log 
off  and tell my parents so they 
can try to make sure it never 
happens again. 

12. I will tell my parents if  I 

receive pictures, links to bad 
sites, e-mail or instant messag-
es with bad language or if  I’m 
in a chat room where people 
are using swear words or mean 
and hateful language. 

13. I will not send anything in the 
post to anyone I’ve met online, 
without my parents’ okay. If  I 
get something in the post from 
someone I’ve met online, I’ll 
tell my parents immediately 
(because that means they have 
my private information). 

14. I will not do anything online 
that someone asks me to if it 
makes me feel uncomfortable, 
especially if I know it’s some- 
thing my parents would not be 
happy about or approve of. 

Guidelines for Children and Young People78

15. I will not call, write a snail mail 
or meet in person anyone who 
I’ve met online without my 
parents’ approval or without a 
trusted adult coming with me. 
16. I understand my parents will 
supervise my time online and 
may use software to monitor 
or limit where I go online. 
They’re doing this because 
they love me and want to 
protect me.

I will teach my parents more 
about the Internet so we can have 
fun together and learn cool new 
things.

I agree to the above.

I promise to protect my child’s 
safety online by making sure 
these rules are followed. If  my 
child encounters unsafe situations 
and tells me, I will handle each 
situation with maturity and good 
sense, without blaming anyone, 
and will calmly work through it 
with my child to ensure their safer 
Internet experiences in the future. 

Parent signature(s)

Date

Child signature

Date 

www.itu.int/copGuidelines for Children and Young PeoplePhoto credits: www.shutterstock.com, Ahone Ayeh Njume-Ebong/ITU 

Guidelines for Children and Young PeopleInternational Telecommunication Union
Place des Nations
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
www.itu.int/cop

Printed in Switzerland
Geneva, 2016

With the support of:

